SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Good morning everyone. Uh, I mean, good afternoon, uh, sums up my day. Welcome back. Any questions from yesterday? Can't see you in the back, can you hear me in the back? Yes, fine, cool. Great. OK, I left yesterday's session saying that's what we're going to do today is probably. What I would consider the most demanding material because we're going through a little bit of. Dynamic analysis, and we're obviously going to do it much. Simpler than we would in a 2nd or 3rd year course, um, in particular we're going to just rely on graphical analysis as opposed to algebraic analysis because being a principles course we're trying to get across the intuition more and the basic ideas rather than all the ins and outs of the technical details. As a reminder we are trying to build a model of economic growth we're not trying to explain everything there is to know or study about economic growth by no means on the contrary, we are going back to our simple static production model where we ask the question whether differences in capital endowments are able to. Explain the variations in output per person that we see in the data across the world. That's a very well defined clear question and that's how we should approach these problems as much as possible. So we avoid. Gross hand waving as much as possible. What was the conclusion or the answer to that question? We did Play around with the model a little bit. Had a table there, a couple of tables, did some comparisons of predicted values of the model to the actual data that we observe, and what was the result of all that. Yes. I'm still sorry, I'm still before this actually uh I'm taking a step back and just talking about the, the, the static model that we did before, so not, not growth yet, just the original uh model yeah. Exactly. So Yes, capital endowments go some way towards explaining the differences in living standards, but only some way. In fact, it doesn't even explain half of the variation of output per person across the world. Ultimately we will need to allow another factor to vary in order to make sense of the data, and that other factor is the only other variable or parameter in this case that we can vary in our model. That's the total factor productivity. So yes, capital matters, it's important, but it's not enough to explain the differences in living standards. That was our conclusion from our static model. And We could use that straight away as a guide for where else to look and importantly also on how to build a growth model. Suggesting that our parameter A is gonna be pretty important probably right given the question that we asked and the answer we found to that question in the static model. But that becomes complicated quite quickly, so we're just going to essentially continue with that original static model which focuses on capital accumulation as the main explanatory of differences in living standards and now make it dynamic and argue that it is capital accumulation that is the driver of economic growth and see how far we can take this and whether the data is is kind to that model or not. And you should have a hunch that it's probably not going to do so well because the static model already didn't do so well, right? Again, we're doing this because we need to walk before we can run so that was our starting point, our static model. What is our static model consist of? Basically just a single. Production function, which we assume to apply to the entire economy. So we imagine as the eco economy being described by a single aggregate production function. We then have to add a couple of bells and whistles, however, in order to make the story dynamic. The first one is that we actually now have to endogenize capital, whereas in the static model because we're just analysing. The economy at a point in time, capital at that point in time is just a given. It's just a datum. It's exogenous. We are now allowing capital to change over time and so we want to make capital an endogenous variable. So we are endogenizing it. What was previously exogenous, we are now making endogenous, and when we endogenize a variable, that means that we have to add another equation, right? Otherwise we're not able to solve the system of equations. So we have to describe how capital is going to evolve over time and that's given by this equation over here. Net investment, the change in the capital stock delta K is equal to gross investment I minus total depreciation DK. So once again, if gross investment I is just equal to total depreciation DK. Then net investment delta K is going to be equal to 0. What does that mean? That means that the capital stock remains constant. We are just investing enough in order to replace the capital stock that gets destroyed in the production process. No more, no less. What else? We are for simplicity assuming the labour force to be constant. A fixed number, exogenous. Is that realistic? Of course not. But we don't want to make our lives any more complicated than it already is, so we're going to not focus on labour at the moment. There are plenty of models that will endogenize labour as well. We've got a resource constraint which simply tells us how output is divided, namely across these two expenditure categories, C and I. Think of this as the national income accounting identity without a government and in a closed economy where net exports are always equal to zero. And finally, we have to determine what the allocation of resources is. In other words, Robinson Crusoe, who collects coconuts, has to decide how many coconuts to eat versus how many coconuts to invest. This is Just an assumption. We know that if investment is a fixed proportion of output, that fixed proportion is obviously gonna have to be between 0 and 1. Do we know whether it's optimal, we don't know. We're just assuming it ultimately if we wanted to describe behaviour properly, we would have to look at Robinson Crusoe's preferences and solve some kind of intertemporal utility maximisation problem where he decides how much to invest at each point in time based on his preferences and and uh the constraints that he faces. OK, so this is in some ways also a shortcut. 2nd and 3rd year courses you will do just that. You will, uh, you will, this is one of the equations that will change so that you can actually talk about welfare and think about what's optimal. And so we have essentially two exogenous variables here L and K. L we've already seen here is just determined exogenously because we need a number for the constant level of labour and because this is a dynamic model and capital, even though all the later values of capital are endogenous, we need to start with some value. Right? And that's always the case when you have dynamic models. These dynamic equations, they always tell you how a variable changes over time. But that means that you still need some kind of information about where. You are supposed to place that change, right? Suppose I'm describing, describing my behaviour, um, suppose my behaviour is one step to the right and two steps forward, right? That's the change, one step to the right, 2 steps forward. Now if I want to be able to say where I am at any one point in time and all I tell you is that I move one step to the right and 2 steps forward. You don't know where I'm going to be. Why don't you know where I'm going to be? Because all I've told you is how I'm changing. I haven't told you where I am at any one point in time. But if I tell you that I start off over here and I take one, yeah, then, then you have all the information that you need. Or I could tell you that after 3 steps. I'm going to be over here in period 3 or at the end of my movements what we call a terminal condition I'm going to be over here and then you can work backwards knowing how I behave and you know that I'll be over here 3 periods earlier or whatever OK so that's why when we do dynamic analysis which describes the change in the variable we also always need some other condition beginning condition, a terminal condition, or some kind of intermediate condition that tells us. Where this variable is, at some point in time, and that's exogenous. OK, and the other three then are are parameters. Everyone on board? Everyone clear about this? Cool. So, Uh, this just described the schematic that, um, I, uh, I went through yesterday already, so I'm not gonna go through it again. We could solve this model and analyse it algebraically, so we just. Grind through the algebra and calculate whatever we need to calculate. But we're not going to do that. Instead, we're going to analyse the model graphically. And in order to do that, we basically simplify the system of equations down to a system of two equations. The first one is just taking our production function again, and we might as well simplify because L is not going to change, it's going to remain constant. We can just put our exogenous level of labour in there and that means that if since A is also an exogenous parameter, as soon as we've got a value for K we can solve for Y straightforward. The second equation takes our capital accumulation equation and substitutes our investment or allocation equation. With the uh with the investment, uh, with, with this term over here S times Y. OK, so this here is I gross investment, and as before, we've got our total capital depreciation here. So those are essentially the two equations that we'll be interested in. And importantly, when we do this, um, Graphically, we We actually mostly work with just the 2nd equation, the dynamic, the capital accumulation equation. So this is uh the so-called solo diagram. It's the chart that basically summarises The The system of equations of our solo swan growth model and it allows us to make some inferences about the behaviour of the system. Probably one reason why Solo's model was more successful or popular than Swan's model, because he was able to translate his model into quite a neat diagram that has proven to be very useful, whereas Swan's was more elaborate and perhaps less intuitive. So the solo model starts with. The capital accumulation equation and breaks it into its two constituent parts. On the X axis, we've got the capital stock, K. On the y axis we've got all the other variables that we are interested in, all the other variables that are going to be functions of the capital stock. Now we could have the total capital stock here or as we've seen before, we could divide through the production function by labour and get everything in per capita terms, in which case we would have lower case k here, capital per person or capital per worker. Right, the capital labour ratio and then all the other endogenous variables as a function of little K. The properties of the system are the same. That's one of the beauties of having a constant returns to scale production function is that I can just divide through by L and all the properties are unchanged. So, How do I graph this bit over here? Well, that should be pretty straightforward. Forget about, this is just a constant here, right? If I just want to graph YT as a function of KT, what is that going to look like? Well, we've seen this before, right? It's a production function as a function of K. And what do we know about the production function, it's got diminishing marginal returns. diminishing margin of product in K. So it's gonna be increasing in cave, but it's gonna be concave. So it's going to look something like this. Right. Now we are just multiplying. That production function. By a fraction between 0 and 1. So it's going to be lower than the production function. So if I were to actually graph the production function, it would be somewhere up here like that. But we've already seen what the properties are of that production function. So the concavity should come as no surprise. Second, we've got our depreciation line, and it should be clear that this is a line because this is just a proportion. The depreciation rate multiplied by the stock of capital. In other words, total depreciation is just proportional to the capital stock. That's just a straight line. Boom. The higher the depreciation line, The higher the slope of the, uh, sorry, the higher the depreciation rate, the steeper. The depreciation line is going to be the bigger the slope, and vice versa. OK. And now we can start thinking a little bit about what the properties of this model are. Well, We've noticed, presumably, that there, that these two intersect, these two lines. What's true when these two lines or, or, or curves intersect? Well, at that point, total investment, I gross investment is equal to at this level of capital is equal to total depreciation. In other words, this quantity is the same as this quantity, which means that the difference between the two is just equal to zero. What does it mean when the difference between the two is equal to 0? It means that delta K net investment, is equal to 0. In other words, the capital stock is neither growing. Nor shrinking, it remains constant. And this is an interesting point for us because if a variable is constant, well, then it seems like we have no more dynamics in the system, right? It's just going to remain constant. And so these points of constancy are important to us, and we will often spend time analysing these points because you can think of them as a kind of resting point or a destination towards which a system will move to evolve or perhaps not, but at least if we are in that or at that point we know that the system comes to a rest. And such a point where the system comes to a rest is what we call a steady state. It's a standard term used in dynamic analysis, so you should know that too, a steady state, right? Think about this, if capital. is just equal to the level associated with the steady state. What's going to happen To the rest of the economy, well. L is constant. So if the capital stock is constant, what will be true of output? It'll be constant if output is constant. What will be true of, say, investment. It'll also be constant, right? If investment is constant and output is constant, what's true of consumption? It's constant. So the economy just sits there, it's constant. No more change that's what a steady state is all about. Now, we'd like to know a few things about the steady state, in particular, We know that when we are in the steady state. The economy comes to a halt. There is no more change, no more growth. But the question is, if we are out of a steady state. How does the economy behave? Are we actually going to move towards the steady state, away from the steady state, just keep a a constant distance from the steady state? And so this is where we then have to start thinking about the dynamics of the economy. Think about it the following way. Suppose we start off, and this is why you can see where the starting value of capital is important, right? Suppose we start off with the capital stock over here. At that level of capital, total depreciation is given by this amount over here. Total gross investment is given by this amount over here. What's the distance between the two, the difference between gross investment and total depreciation? Well, that's just net investment, right? We've already talked about this. So we have positive net investment. What does positive net investment mean? It means we're adding to the capital stock. And so this means that in the next period, one, the capital stock is going to be greater than the capital stock and zero, so we move to the right. What's true at this level of capital? Well, total depreciation is given by this amount over here. Gross investment is given by that amount over there. There's a positive. Gap here, in other words, net investment is positive. We're adding to the capital stock, which means that the capital stock in the following period, 2, is going to be greater than the capital stock in period 1. So we move over here. In two, once again, same story, total depreciation is here, gross investment is over there. There's a positive gap we're adding to the capital stock. subsequent capital stock is going to be greater than previously, and so on, suggesting that we're going to move all the way as we close the gap here to this point over here, our steady state value of capital which we denote with an asterisk. In general, we denote our values in the steady state with an asterisk, so we are clear about whether we're talking about steady states or not. So that seems to suggest that if we start off with this capital stock over here we're going to move towards our steady state. What about if we happen to start off with a really large amount of capital? Well, if we had this really large amount of capital we would be having a gross investment of this amount, total depreciation of that amount, which means that we now have a negative net investment. In other words, we're using up more capital than we are replacing, and so the capital stock is going to shrink. And that's going to apply by the same logic in each subsequent period all the way up to this point over here. So it seems to suggest that no matter where we start, right, no matter what initial capital stock we choose, we are going to move towards and eventually end up in this. Steady state where capital is equal to K. Everyone clear about that? Is this? Yes. Correct, right? The net investment becomes smaller and smaller because this distance becomes smaller and smaller. And this actually So that's a good point, this actually means that. In a dynamic setting like this, the adjustment towards the steady state. Follows what we call a little bit of technical terminology follows the principle of transition dynamics. OK. The principle of transition dynamics. It's just another term for saying that the approach to the steady state will be asymptotic. In other words, or another way of saying this is that the farther away we are from the steady state, the faster we are moving towards the steady state, the closer we are to the steady state, the slower the movement towards the steady state. So here the changes are big towards the steady state here they become smaller and smaller, infinitesimal. So mathematically, strictly speaking, we never reached the steady state, only in the limit, right? OK, yes. Uh, yeah, sure, and that's one of the things that we can play around with analysing this model is to think about well what happens when the depreciation rate changes, what happens when the investment rate changes, what happens when any of the parameters or or variables change in our model, then yes, that would affect. Both a steady state and And then also the transition towards the steady state. So, We have identified the steady state here. That occurs when the capital stock is equal to K, namely when gross investment is equal to total depreciation. Is this the only steady state in this economy? Maybe there are Well, it could be the only one. There could be more, maybe 2 or 3 or 4. But it'd be useful to know whether it's a unique steady state or not. OK, when we, when we talk about a steady stay that applies to all variables then at once, right? So, um. So what I'm asking is. Apart from the steady state associated with KSA, is there another steady state? Are you At the origin, exactly, right? When the capital stock is 0. There's no investment, then there's no output, there's no consumption, there's nothing. It's a steady state because you can't add to the capital. If there's no output from which you can invest to add to the capital. So this is definitely a steady state. If the capital stock is exactly 0. We'll remain there What if we have just a little bit of positive capital? What happens then? How is the economy going to evolve? Suppose I move just a tiny bit to the right from this steady state. Am I going to move back to that steady state? Like I was over here. Or even though I'm very close to the steady state here, am I actually going to move to the steady state over here? The answer is yes. Right. Over here, I've got a very big net investment. Yeah. So I'm just gonna keep adding to the capital stock and so the K0 can be anywhere just as long as it's not where K is exactly equal to 0. And so in many respects this is just a theoretical curiosity because there's always a positive amount of capital around. But it's useful for us to get to, get used to. The dynamics. So this is a steady state which seems to attract. As long as we don't start off exactly here, then. The economy is going to move towards that steady state. This is a steady state that seems to repel. Alternative Terminology that we often use is this is a stable steady state and this is an unstable steady state. And sometimes you will also come across the terminology. Where we call this a sink, you can think of it as water sucking into a drain, right? Everything in the neighbourhood is going to be sucked in. Like a, like an a vortex, um, and this is a source like water bubbling out of a source. The way to think about this when you do stability analysis is imagine a marble and I've got a bowl. Right. If the marble sits at the bottom of the bowl, it's just gonna sit there. Now I can perturb the marble, and the ball is such that it's gonna oscillate, but eventually the marble will come back to a rest at the bottom of the bowl, right, in the valley. So that's the equivalent of a steady, steady a stable steady state. Alternatively, I can turn the ball around and I can, if I have sufficiently. Quiet, calm hands, I can balance the marble on the top of the hill. Right? That's a steady state. If nothing happens, if it's perfectly quiet, it's gonna stay there, but even the slightest touch means that the marble is gonna roll away, never to return. To the top of the hill. That's an unstable steady state. OK, so that's how you can maybe visualise what's going on. OK, so what are the implications of this solo model? We've identified. Existence of a steady state or two steady states, but one only being economically relevant really the stable one and what the dynamics around that steady state are the transitions um. So we can say something about this model, namely that all else being equal, the Solar Swan model predicts that there's going to be an end to growth in per capita income. Why? Because once you've reached the steady state, everything comes to a grinding halt. Right? The second implication is that Because of the Principle of transition dynamics, where you move faster to the steady states when you are far away from the steady state. And not so fast when you are close to the steady state. That's just another way of saying that there's some kind of catching up happening, right? So if you imagine this is a This is a poor country over here. It's going to grow pretty fast. Why does it grow fast? Because it accumulates capital fast. A country that's relatively rich is over here. It's not going to grow very fast. It already has a lot of capital, so it's not going to accumulate much capital. Yeah, so you can imagine them all running that race towards the steady state. So that second implication is just a visualisation of this convergence hypothesis that we already talked about in the introduction of the growth chapter. Right. And we saw that, yes, for some countries, the convergence hypothesis seems to hold. But only for a subset of the world's countries if we broaden it to include. A much larger sample or the world. As a whole, we no longer have this convergence hypothesis. Now, what Does our model tell us? With respect to that convergence hypothesis. If we are all moving towards the same steady state. Then the poor countries should indeed grow faster than the poor countries and catch up with the rich countries. But What determines the steady state? How do we know which. Where a country is going to end up, what its steady state is. Well, that's gonna depend on whatever affects investment, right, because it's dependent on the position of this curve, and it's gonna depend on depreciation. Now depreciation typically does not vary that much across countries. Why? Well, because the law of physics are pretty much the same everywhere. Just because you happen to be on the equator doesn't mean that gravity is somehow bigger or stronger or friction is greater or whatever than it is elsewhere closer to the poles, for example. So we wouldn't expect there to be much variation in the position of the blue line, but there could be some variation the green line because countries could invest more say and so higher investment rates would mean that there is a higher investment curve, a higher investment curve means. A higher steady state level of capital. And so that country would be moving towards a different steady state than another country. So, One possibility is that If we don't observe convergence, then maybe it's just that countries are moving to different steady states because they have some different policy parameters in place. Different propensities to invest, say. That's a possibility That is what we call conditional convergence. So in in other words, countries are moving towards their steady state, but every country has its own steady state that it's moving towards depending on, for example, the investment rate that it chooses. So that suggests maybe we have conditional convergence. Every country is just moving towards its own steady state and that's why we don't observe unconditional convergence in the data. But the reality is that even conditional convergence focusing on the different possible steady states does not seem to adequately match the data. There seems to be even more going on. What is that more going on? What is it that still. It makes us unable to explain all the differences in the living standards over time across country. Well, we've seen it before. A. We'll keep coming back to A, the total factor productivity TFP, right? Now you could argue that what's really going on is that part of the if you wanna think about the the um conditional convergence right you could argue that the conditional convergence does not just depend on the S investment parameters but it also depends on the total factor productivity TFPs so any country that's um. Has a high TFP will also have a much higher Investment curve meaning that it's Pushing towards or moving towards a higher steady state with a higher capital stock. So that's well possible, but then still that begs the question in the very long run we would expect countries to settle down and yet we've seen countries grow over a period of 150 years, even if the growth rates become smaller over time, there's still some steady growth and, and we wouldn't expect the steady state to be reached in more than 150 years, right? It, it should be much faster than that. So So again we can take this model a certain distance right we can argue conditional convergence because countries rich countries perhaps are moving towards higher steady states because they've got higher TFP and and the poorer countries have lower TFP and perhaps lower investment, but it still leaves something unexplained, namely this idea that there actually is ongoing growth. We look at the data and we see that countries even over a period of 150 years are able to maintain growth. And the solo model just Cannot explain that. Why not? Because the solo model always assumes that ultimately a country is going to be at or near its steady state and its steady state growth stops. And then we have precisely what we don't see in the data. I mean, maybe the maybe the process is so slow maybe we actually all are moving towards a steady state. Where growth is going to stop. Maybe that's still gonna happen, right? But everything that we know about dynamics and so on suggests that that's not the case. Everyone clear about that? Oh. So Those are the implications of um convergence like I said. Yeah this is just more uh in in words of what of of what I just said, um, so we shouldn't really expect con we should we should not expect unconditional convergence just because different countries. Have different properties, but even conditional convergence is Is uh is problematic, um. So at least for countries that are sufficiently similar, we can get some kind of conditional convergence amongst those countries, right? Um OK, so, So clearly what matters. Is this parameter A again TFP we've seen this already in the static model. Comes out as being an important factor in the in the uh dynamic model as well. As I said before, if we change the technology parameter TFP in our. Dynamic model, the solar swan model, um, It's going to raise our investment curve. It's going to raise our output curve as well. Um, so I wanna have a discussion about A in a moment, what this A is just because it's so crucial. But This solo diagram is Uh, you know, allows us to think about some other things as well. So first of all, we can play around with any changes in the parameters and the exogenous variables, right? So suppose we are at KSTA. And suddenly there is a. Right, suddenly there is an increase in the investment rate. Overnight we decide, OK, we're gonna invest more. Robinson Cruso wakes up in the morning, says, Yeah, I'm bored. I have enough to eat right now. I'm gonna start investing more, right? So what does that do? That means that overnight, the investment rate's going to rise, so that's going to shift the entire investment curve up and that means that we're going to have a new steady state. But we don't just jump to the new steady state, we're gonna have to gradually move towards the new steady state. So we can then analyse what the transition to the new steady state is do that in a moment. We can also read off some of the other variables in this diagram. For example, we might want to know what total output is. How would I be able to read off what total output is? Well, remember the investment curve is just S times total output, so it sits below the output curve. So I could just put the output curve up here, right? I'd have to draw it properly. I haven't drawn it here. That's what the output curve would look like. And Maybe I'm interested in consumption. How can I read off consumption in my solo diagram? The difference between the two curves, right, if I draw my output curve like this. And I've got my investment curve over here, then the difference between output and investment is consumption. Why? Because Y is equal to C + I. So I can basically. Glean almost all the information that I'm typically interested in from this solo diagram. OK. So Let's have another quick discussion about this TFP parameter A because it is so crucial. And in particular what the data suggests is that not only are the rich countries Endowed with a higher total factor productivity compared to the low. As compared to the the poor countries. But to the extent that we seem to be seeing ongoing growth. In the world, not No steady states, that seems to suggest then that A, the technology parameter is actually also growing over time and in fact it's perhaps consistently growing over time. Which suggests that yes capital accumulation is partly driving the growth process, but the increase in our TFP parameter A is ultimately responsible for ongoing growth where we don't have the existence of a steady state. So what is this A? What is this A? How should we think about it? Well, There are Three main forget about this for a moment, there are 3 main elements that we think are contained in this A. I said before that we often treat the A as a residual because we cannot measure it directly. Ideally we would want to measure it, stick it into our model and then see how our model predicts. By comparing it to the data, but we can't do that because we can't measure a well so often what we do is we. Flip the equation around and solve for A, and then we can study the properties of A and see whether it's reasonable perhaps, um, and, and how that compares to the rest of the model. Can't remember whether I mentioned this not or not, but the, the economist Mordechai Kurtz. From Stanford University said that our parameter A TFP parameter A is actually just a measure of our ignorance because that's what a residual is, right? It, it, it explains. Everything that we haven't explicitly accounted for. We've got capital, we've got labour, we've got any, you know, we understand that, but then everything else that is important to explain the variation in output per person. Falls to that to that TFP parameter which we haven't modelled. So economists have pretty much settled on 3 main components of what this TFP parameter can be. The first one is human capital. Now what do we mean by human capital? It's essentially the skills, right, with which. We workers work. The skills that we have acquired. Now, that is something that we possibly can measure. That's the easiest of those three components. How might we measure human capital? OK. Literacy rates, for example, yes, absolutely, literacy is a huge boost to growth, right? Literacy is really important. Or having a productive economy, yes. Yeah, qualifications or educational attainments more generally, yeah, that's, that's absolutely right. So that's all focusing on formal education, which is really important, absolutely, um, and that is something that we can measure quite easily we can go across the world and we get measures of educational attainment and we could explicitly. Allow for that rewrite the model and put human capital in there explicitly, right? to account for the differences in human capital and yes, the differences in human capital will actually help explain some of the variation in output, but it's still not enough to explain everything, right? But at least it helps us open the black box that TFP is and unpack that a bit. But it's not just formal education, it's also. Essentially learning on the job and, and there are arguably even some cultural factors involved as well, right? Um, so how, how focused people are on the job, how disciplined and so on that. Falls to some extent under human capital, and that's just as important. you know, a number of empirical studies have argued that that's equally important to formal education. Right? Um, so one of the problems, for example, for, for children that grow up in households where both parents say are long term unemployed is that they don't develop those. Those important soft skills that come with the culture of work of knowing the importance of being work on time all the time and applying yourself and not being distracted and and so on, right? Those are those are important aspects but much much more difficult to grasp but they they really matter um and then of course learning on the job also means that there's certain skills that you acquire that just come through practise which you. Can't get simply by sitting in a classroom. OK. So that's human capital, that's clearly important. The second one is what we call technology. Remember we had that initial photo of Two scenes of agricultural production, one in the poor country and one in the rich country, and you would have noticed straight and you wouldn't have had to think more than half a second to determine which photo was taken in a rich country and which photo was taken in a poor country, right? The rich country has got the sophisticated tractor with the air conditioned cabin and, you know, everything. Very comfortable um and big. Um, not so in the, in the poor country. Um So we have a notion of technology. Right? Now, the tricky bit is that the technology is embedded in the capital. We've pretended as though we can separate the two, but of course the technology is embedded in the, in the capital. So More better technology means higher TFP means higher productivity. How should we think about technology? What, what is technology, how would you define that? To your 90 year old grandmother who's gonna call you tonight and ask you what you learned. What is technology? It's the product of science, that's nice. What is the product of science? Yeah, it's pretty, pretty good definition.
