SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Alright, good afternoon everyone, welcome to the last week before the two week teaching break, which. I suspect everyone's looking forward to. Be able to perhaps step down one gear, um. Yeah, catch your breath a little bit, do a little bit of revising and so on. Do you have any questions from what we did last week? Yes. That's All there is to the solo swan diagram, or the solo diagram really is the relationship between the investment curve and the depreciation line because. From those two schedules, we can determine the dynamics of the system and that is what the solo diagram is really about is to understand the dynamics of the system. Everything else. Derives from that. So if you're interested in understanding what happens to output or what happens to consumption, for example, you can just do that from the solo diagram, um, so I don't have my laptop here today, which means that I can't draw on the slides at the moment, um, but if you've got the, if you've got the investment curve, for example, I, I can also draw the, Output curve, the output curve is gonna look exactly, I think we briefly discussed that, right, it's gonna look pretty much the same as the investment curve. Once again, it's concave because we've got diminishing marginal product to capital and since on the X axis we've got capital output being a function of capital, it's going to be concave, and how can I then read off consumption on the solo diagram? Well, it's just the vertical distance between actual output, And investment, right, because C+ I is equal to Y. So if I can read off investment and I've got output, then I can read off consumption. And So pretty much all the variables that we're interested in we can read off from the solo diagram. Like I said, unfortunately I can't do this on the. On the computer here at the moment, maybe I can briefly uh discuss that again tomorrow. First thing, the first few minutes of the lecture, um. But uh there's nothing else for us really to to uh put on the diagram in order to. Understand the system and the dynamics that we're interested in. Is that, is that clear or? Again, I can give you a quick example uh tomorrow that'll be easier probably, um, like I said. Any other questions? OK, good. Well then let me continue with. The final few. Issues surrounding our growth chapter, we had a reasonable, reasonably extensive discussion about the solo swan model. Solar swan model of course is a model that presupposes that the driver of economic growth is capital accumulation. And what the model shows us is that because we assume constant returns to scale and diminishing marginal product to capital or diminishing returns to capital, we're going to ultimately end up with a steady state where net investment is equal to 0. In other words, gross investment is just large enough to replace the amount of capital that gets destroyed in the production process. When we have net investment equal to 0, we are no longer adding to the capital stock. And so the capital stock remains constant and the driver of growth therefore disappears. So we only have growth when we're out of steady state and when we're in steady state we no longer have any growth, and that does not sit well with the facts right so we have therefore concluded that there's got to be something else really that drives economic growth in the long run. doesn't mean that the. Capital accumulation process is entirely unimportant by no means, and in particular it's a useful way to think about how growth happens for the poorest countries, because they don't tend to suddenly become technological superstars, but instead they tend to initially grow quite quickly because they are simply emulating what the rich countries are already doing, accumulating a lot of capital where they get a lot of bang for their buck. And then as they become richer and richer and the economy becomes increasingly saturated with capital, the capital accumulation process can no longer be the driver of economic growth. So one way to think about this, this is not a one for one analogy, but yeah and useful way to think about this is that. Initially you countries, when they, when they manage to grow and they're in that catch up phase where capital accumulation is the the main driver of economic growth, these are countries that tend to be imitators. They don't develop a lot of new technology themselves, they just imitate. Classic example is China in the 70s, 80s, 90s, where, and I kid you not, this is, you know, they, they would take a Mercedes, a VW, a Renault car, or whatever, they'd have a bunch of engineers around it and they would take it apart bit by bit and just see how is this thing actually produced, right? Um and learn from that. And they became better and better. And they learned how to essentially reproduce what was already out there. And then accumulate capital so that they could actually produce those kind of goods and became better and better at that. Now there are, as I, as it is obvious there are limits to how you can grow that way because as you saturate the economy with capital, that's clearly not the long run driver of economic growth. So then eventually a country. We'll have to shift from being an imitator to an innovator. If you want to continue to grow, you're going to have to start pushing out the technology frontier. And, and start innovating and that's what China of course in part has has been doing and quite successfully so. Other countries have struggled with that, and you may have heard countries getting stuck in the so-called middle income trap. This is often referred to places like Malaysia, for example, which has been very good at imitating and struggled to convert and restructure the economy from an imitation economy to an innovation economy. Now it's not one for one, this is, there's a little bit of hand waving going on here, but it's, but it's another way to think about. How this growth process works right? initially the capital accumulation process probably is actually the dominant one, but that's only for the initial phases then later on for long run sustained growth you need something else, right? And this is essentially where we left off with in our discussion is the importance of total factor productivity TFP and the question was what is TFP right? what? What do we think of as being in that black box that we call TFP? And as I said, there are 3 main components that we normally think of as comprising TFP, and that's human capital, it's technology, and its institutions. We talked about human capital, saying that that's probably the easiest of the ones, it's also the ones that the one that we actually can measure to some extent. One relatively easy way of doing this is to measure, say, formal education or educational attainment levels. But that's the only part of the human capital that we have in mind, the other human capital that we have in mind is essentially that is the the learning from doing. Um, so you don't, it's not just reliance on formal education but also essentially informal learning. Um, OK, and so if we were to explicitly account for human capital in our production function, we could go some way towards explaining growth. To a greater extent than we can without explicitly accounting for human capital, but that still leaves the TFP parameter doing a fair bit of work. So then the second component is technology and there we realise that this is something, A very fuzzy concept, it's hard to describe and it's very hard to measure. What did we more or less agree on how to think about technology, what, how might we define it, what is it? Yes, it's, it's the accumulation or the, the, uh, the overall stock of knowledge, knowledge, ideas, blueprints, know-how, uh, different ways of, of trying to put that exactly right. Um, and given that this is hard to grasp, I think we realised quickly that it's also very hard to measure. One way to do this is to think about patents, say, but patents are a very imperfect way of measuring knowledge. No I'm not gonna get into that, but that's what what people have tried to do, um, and again as a reminder of course the technology is typically embodied in the in the physical capital it's not like we can separate it and yet in our models we often pretend as though we can't separate it we treat the quantity of physical capital separately from the quality of physical capital and the technology is essentially the quality of physical capital. So if we make attempts to Explicitly account for technology in our models and we somehow come up even with extremely crude measures of technology. Once again we can improve our empirical fit, but it's still not enough to explain all the differences in living standards, which means that there's yet something else, and that is what we typically call, broadly speaking, institutions. Put it in quotation marks, because once again institutions is is a fuzzy concept, arguably even fuzzier than technology. What do we mean by institutions? Anything in a society or market economy that ultimately influences how efficiently resources are used. Now that's a super vague concept, it. Sounds similar to. That quote that I gave you last week by Mordechai Kurtz, who said that. Our parameter A is really just a measure of our ignorance, right? What we have in mind is broadly speaking, Anything that's Relates to how markets function and how people and institutions and economic actors more generally are able to interact. Mostly what comes under this is. Things like the rule of law, security of property rights. Um The depth and and and but they're all related, right, the depth and um lack of friction in financial markets and so on. Without these, Strong institutions, let's put it that way, markets don't work well. So if you don't have secure if you don't have secure property rights, for example, no one will want to invest, because if, if the fruits of your investment are easily, Are easily appropriated by a predatory state, for example, then why would you invest a lot, um, and risk having everything taken away from you. That's why most economists don't think that. Hardcore socialism, where you essentially pay a 100% tax rate works very well. The importance of property rights and the rule of law is really important for financial markets to work well. If In order for large scale production to take place, typically the the uh, The entrepreneur needs external funding or financing because they don't, you know, someone may have a good idea for a product or. Production But they don't have the funds, so A well functioning economy is able to match the investors with the entrepreneurs, but that means that we have some kind of financial contract. Right, the entrepreneur needs to borrow from the investor, and the investor in turn once again needs to be reasonably confident that they're gonna get their money back. They signed some kind of debt contract and so the investor provides the funds and 10 years later the funds uh come back with interest. For that process to work. In other words, have in order to have well functioning financial markets, you need a solid rule of law. The investor needs to know that they can, if there is any doubt about the entrepreneur repaying their debt, they can go to the court and the court's gonna side with the entrepreneur and not with the uh uh sorry, with the with the with the uh investor and not with the entrepreneur. Um, it's We take these things for granted, often in a country like Australia. You may wonder, well, how could it be any other other way? This is absolutely crucial, right, without those kind of institutions in place. We would not have, excuse me, we would not have a deep, well functioning market. And And therefore The ability also in particular to Engage in highly intertemporal trade, right? And so what do, what do financial markets do essentially? Right? Financial markets are Among the most precarious markets out there, if not the most precarious market out there, why? What's the difference between a financial market and the market for chocolate bars? There are some fundamental differences between Between those markets, between the kind of exchange that takes place and the products that are being exchanged. This is kind of preempting a little bit what we're going to follow on from this chapter, but it's, it's, it's so essential, so important, um, that we might as well go ahead, yeah. Uh, where does the exchange happen up front? So like, like a chocolate bar. Exactly, so right, you, you, you give me the chocolate bar, I hand you the money, and that's it, right, we never need to meet again, we, our, Our relationship is consummated essentially and that's it. Whereas if we engage in a, say, a debt contract, you lend me $1000 which I promised to repay in 3 years plus interest. What are we actually exchanging? Promises, very good, exactly, we are exchanging promises. Financial markets are essentially all about trading promises, and guess what? Promises are not always kept. Right, promises are broken. There is an incentive to break promises. And so our relationship is not consummated as soon as you hand me over the IOU and I hand over the, the, the, the cash, right? We, we've, we've got an ongoing relationship whether you like it or not, right? Um, and, and because we're trading promises, financial markets are fundamentally very different kind of beast from the market for, for chocolate bars. But we'll talk more about this in a moment. My key point here, why I'm bringing this up now, is that for those markets to work well, we need strong institutions. If you don't have the rule of law, if you don't have security of property rights, if you've essentially got a corrupt system. Financial markets are not going to work well, no one will want to invest, no one will want to lend, no one will want to borrow, and so on. And You won't have very deep markets. You won't have the opportunity for um for large scale investments, um, big productivity gains and so on. It's not just the formal stuff. With institutions, it's not just about whether you've got a good court system. It's also all the informal stuff, how we engage with one another, right? The level of trust, examples, so we, I think I mentioned this before, how important it is to have. Um, So deep markets require a Large degree of trust. Among Completely anonymous people, again, we take this, we don't think about it, right, we take it completely. On For granted, it's just the way it is, but um, did I mention this before? I can't remember whether I I I talked about um, The, the differences in trust across cultures, for example, did I mention this? No, OK, so, so there's some interesting work by, by, um, Anthropologists in particular, psychologists, sociologists, economists are a little bit late to that party unfortunately, but um. We know how important trust is for deep markets. But We also know that trust varies greatly across cultures and societies. And There's some interesting differences in particular. Western industrialised societies are rather individualistic. I, I don't want to go into the entire philosophy, you know, we can go back to John Lockan's. Kantian enlightenment and Calvinism and so on, but the bottom line, they're pretty individualistic and, That means that there is a reasonable amount of trust among people, but importantly, there is a relatively high level of trust that extends across a, a very distant boundary of people, lots of a reasonably high level of trust that extends to people we don't know that we we may only meet once and never again. Why does this matter? Well, every time you go into a restaurant, right, there's no, no one really doubts that you get your food first, you eat a nice meal and then before you leave you pay and you and everyone's happy, right? You get into a taxi, you, you dropped off at your destination and, and then you pay. We, like I said, we just take these things for granted, but they're actually not normal in in the sense that the majority of people actually live in different kind of societies. Namely, much more family clan based systems where there is a very high level of trust within the boundary of whatever it is, the village, the clan, the fam the the greater family and so on, and then the trust drops off dramatically beyond that family clan boundary. So So that high trust means there's a, there's a very strong bond within. That boundary, and then beyond, it makes it very difficult to engage in any kind of transaction. Or interaction. It turns out that for markets to work well, you kind of need the former and not the latter kind of uh uh societal structure. This immediately raises some very tricky questions, right? Suppose you are working for AusAID or DFAT and you're trying to give some clever advice about how, how um markets should be structured. In order to um make some efficiency gains. You very quickly get into this sticky situation where you may run up against cultural norms. And it obviously it's not gonna go down well if you say no, you should, you should essentially have a different culture that, that uh. You know, where you, you have trusts, um. That extends much further and and um you, you adopt Western society's values. I, I don't know what the answer is, I don't know what the, what the, what the resolution to that is, right? I'm just describing it in in positive terms, um, remember the difference between positive and normative economics. I'm just describing it in positive terms that there are these differences that we increasingly understand. Cultural norms, social norms that really affect how a market system operates and also influences in no no insignificant manner the efficiency with which uh with which production takes place and therefore market economies operate. OK. So that's why institutions matter and you can very, I mean I'm sure you can understand just how hard it is to, To, to describe it because it, how do you describe social norms, for example, it's hard to describe, it's really hard to measure, it's hard to gauge, it's hard to come up with simple policy advice, you can't just come up with a cookbook recipe approach to, to how to change institutions they tend to change quite slowly anyway. Um, sometimes you have revolutions that may change institutions quite quickly. I mean, interestingly, when they do, and these revolutions work well, you actually often do see significant economic activity, um, following on from that. So anyway, really fascinating subject, I think, um. But uh, but one that still remains to be explored in much greater detail and, and I think one that we have to, We have to pursue in a very nuanced, sensitive way, I think it's, it's a difficult one. But this is where we perhaps can Draw an arc to some of the first comments that were made when I asked you why do you think countries are rich and countries are poor. We had, we had a couple of possible answers, something like, Um, the colon, you know, the, the, the, the former colonisers were the ones who, because they were able to exploit the colonies and therefore were able to grow rich, um, whereas the colonies themselves remain poor. There is some evidence that that's true, but there are also counterexamples. And there is one really big counterexample, and that's the USA. It was a colony for a few 100 years. It was a British colony, and then it broke free. And decided to do its own thing. And Essentially removed the shackles associated with colonisation. There are other examples as well. Singapore Taiwan, which were able to essentially Uh, remove the shackles of colonisation. And essentially take the best of any kind of Pro-market structures that were left behind. To their benefits, to their economic benefits. But there are plenty of examples where that did not apply, so. Just simply pointing or coming up with a simple story where the colonists did well and the colonies did not do well, is just not a good reflection of the data. Another example and another possible answer was. Um, Endowment of raw materials, right, if you're rich in resources, surely that's gonna make you rich. Seems sensible. Actually, For many countries, being rich in resources has been a curse. It's made them poor and not rich. Why do you think that is? And it's not because, not necessarily because they were exploited as colonies. There's an important other reason now, there, there may be some connection to that, but, but the more direct reason is a different one, yes, corruption, yes. It essentially comes to our third point here, institutions. When you're sitting on a pot of gold. Everyone wants their hands on that pot of gold. It requires strong, good institutions. In a country That Enable that pot of gold to be evenly distributed across all the people in the country. Because if instead you are a dictator, I'm not you, but if if there's a dictator. Well there's a lot of corruption, right, then whoever controls that pot of gold will want to continue to control that pot of gold. Right, they'll build themselves a nice big palace, they'll live a sumptuous life, but the rest of the population perhaps not. So there are not that many examples of countries that are really rich in resources that have been able to do that. The prime example is a country. That we That is probably the epitome of good institutions, and that's Norway. Right, Norway made, it became very rich on account of North Sea oil. And what did they do? They didn't fritter it away for some, for the king and the queen. But they built a sovereign wealth fund and they just they had strong institutions that distributed the wealth for everyone to benefit from such that that the the money was then also not just able to uh to fund a high level of consumption but also essentially high level of investment so that. The, the gains in the future would uh would continue to flow. And, and we know that Norway is going to remain rich even once the North Sea oil runs out, because they have developed the institutions in order to do that. That's a rare example. Most of the time countries have institutions where everyone wants to get their hand on that pot of gold or pot of oil or whatever it is. So institutions are so, so crucial. So the proximate cause. For For why. Having a high endowment of natural resources is more curse rather than a benefit is because of the weak institutions. Yes, if you have strong institutions, then having natural resources is good. But that's not the norm. Does that make sense? So in many ways, right, we are moving away from economics and more into politics and sociology and anthropology in order to understand some of these things, um, but that's, that's cool, right? I mean, uh, economics is a social science and uh we should think of these um, These issues in a broader sense, not just in a purely economic sense. It's very quiet again. I understand Alright, so this is just some of the descriptions, uh what I listed, um. Yeah it's just just a repetition of what I pretty much just said in in words, uh, with a little bit more information once again in those slides, uh, with a yellow background. I'm not going to go through them here, um, I do also mention as 1/4 possibility exogenous shocks, that's not really what we normally think of as being TFP. Um But It's useful occasionally to think about how shocks affect the economy, and in particular large negative shocks. Act like a negative TFP shock, so a war, for example, suddenly causes so much havoc in the economy or say a pandemic, right? It just changes the way everything works. It's like a negative TFP shock and so it can be useful to think about uh about how exogenous shocks. Um Affect the overall productivity in an economy. Um, the other thing to remember is that sometimes, um, Historical accident. May also be a key player. In other words, Everything that we observe in the data is ultimately history or path dependent. We we can't just assume that what worked for one country is just easily going to work for another country because the context is always going to be a different one. That makes it difficult to come up with policy prescriptions again it requires a more nuanced and more sensitive approach to economic analysis. Our instinct as economists is always to try to come up with an overarching theory that explains everything, but we have to. We have to resist that instinct, I think, at times, and accept that. That historical accident matters, that the evolution of economies is often path dependent and history matters, context matters. What worked now may not work in 50 years. What worked in Country A may not work in country B and so on. OK. OK. Then there's a little bit, uh, a bit of a discussion about increasing returns to scale, which I'm going to skip here but it's probably worth having a look at. I just want to say a couple of words about um innovation. So to the extent that technology is clearly an important aspect of TFP and very often we reduce TFP to to just technology. We think of that component as being the primary one, mostly because that is the one that we think can change persistently over time, right? It's hard to imagine how we can change our institutions, how we can develop. Our institutions in such a way that they become 2% more efficient every year, right? That's, that's a little bit hard to imagine, um, and human capital certainly we can keep accumulating over time, but the, the big one here really is technology that seems to be the long run driver of of economic growth. And so then the question is, well, how do we actually change technology, how do we improve technology, how do we generate ideas, how do we innovate? Different ways of saying or asking the same thing. So the OECD for example defines innovation as the implementation of a new or significantly improved product. Could be a good or service, um, a new marketing method or some kind of new organisational method in business practises, workplace organisation or external relations, yada ya. Um, and, and the OECD estimates more or less that about half of economic growth ultimately can be accounted for by innovation activity, right? So clearly innovation seems really important. That's how we generate new ideas. We should remember that not every new idea automatically increases productivity and importantly not every new idea that is created today is going to. Increase productivity today or even tomorrow, very often the benefits of new ideas only. Bear fruit, sometimes decades later. We, we may have new ideas, we may have new technologies, and no one really knows yet what to do with it. That was true, by the way, with the IT revolution as well, right? In the 80s, we had computers, firms increasingly bought these computers because they were kind of cool devices, but economists famously said in the early 90s, we see computers everywhere except for in the economic statistics, in the sense that they are everywhere, everyone seems to be buying them. And somehow using them, but not in a way that made a big difference in terms of our productivity. It, it took a while for firms to realise what they could actually do and achieve, because it wasn't just a marginal increase, it wasn't until they completely overhauled their, The business systems say or how they held inventories or whatever it was, it wasn't until that major overhaul that was enabled through the introduction of IT that they could then gain or make big productivity gains. So sometimes the benefits are decades down the road. Um, and you know, there may be innovations that are bad as well. Um. Arguably, any innovation that creates a deadlier weapon is, is not, is not a good thing for the world, um. Uh But yeah. The other thing to remember then is, and I mentioned this briefly a few weeks ago. Is that innovation is disruptive. Right, it is not the case that when economies grow on average 1.8% per year, that we all are just that little bit more efficient, 1.8% every year, that's just not how it works. Instead, there is a lot of reorganisation in the economy that that takes place, right, there is some. Some innovator with a new product that comes online and suddenly everyone wants that product and so a new firm or new firms, created around that new product, um, Lots of lots of workers are then hired into that new industry and as a consequence other industries then start to falter. Some of them even fold, become obsolete entirely workers lose their jobs, um, and so there is this continuous restructuring churning within the economy that ultimately on average delivers higher living standards, but it can be really messy and also very disruptive, right. To the point that the Austrian macroeconomist Joseph Schumpeter famously referred to this whole process as creative destruction, which I think is a nice way of summarising the, that both Uh, you know, it requires innovation. For the the growth process requires innovation or creativity, the generation of new ideas, but that in itself is also destructive. Uh, and And creates a lot of dislocation and and can be painful for for people. There are losers and winners in the growth process, right, it's not smooth. People lose jobs, firms go bankrupt, and so on. So Having come to this point where we realised just how important. Technology is, and therefore how important innovation is, obviously economists have then started to think in much more detail and rigour, how that innovation process happens and how we might model it and think about it. And this is This gave birth to an entire era of growth models. That succeeded the solo swan growth model. They're called endogenous growth models. Why endogenous? Because now these models. Take TFP. This parameter A and endogenize it rather than just treating it exogenously as a given, they are now thinking about OK how do we explain how A changes over time, just like the solo model took capital and said how do we explain how capital changes over time, the endogenous growth models now say, OK, how does A change over time? What's required in order to do that? We could have a lot of fun building such a model, but we don't have time, so I just want to essentially give you a quick overview of how this process works, right? So they're called endogenous growth models, sometimes also referred to as new growth theory, of course, it's not so new anymore because it started well in the late 80s or early 90s, but at the time it was new and so that name stuck. There are a few components or assumptions within that new growth theory that are crucial, that make it different from the solo swan world and it's. Useful to think about. What they are. The theory starts with pretty much two observations about market economy. The first one is that discoveries, in other words, the generation of new ideas, result from choices. That is to say, That's Whilst we have this romantic view of discoveries. Right, we imagine. Our inventors somehow tinkering away somewhere and then suddenly, oh I have invented I've I've discovered something that was completely unexpected or they're in their shower uh in the morning and suddenly they have a light bulb moment and they come up with a miraculous discovery and so on. That stuff sometimes happens, and sometimes even amazing discoveries. Penicillin, for example, or antibiotics more generally, were essentially discovered by accident that way, right? But that is rare. Discovery's knowledge. They do not fall like manna from heaven. It doesn't just happen. Right, most discoveries happen because people are trying to discover something. They devote resources towards discovering something, they switch on their brains, it's a lot of blood, sweat and tears. Yes, that generates new ideas. Right, it doesn't just happen. In other words, we have to invest, right, devote resources, invest into the production of ideas. So not only do we just invest in accumulating capital, but we actually have to invest in the production of ideas. The more we do that, the more likely we are to come up with ideas. And therefore add to the technology. Now why would people be willing to invest in order to generate new ideas? Well there are some people who do it just for the fun of it, because they like the eureka moment of having discovered something. But a lot of people invest in the generation of ideas because it brings profit, because when you know something that no one else knows, if you know how to produce a product that no one else does and that product is a great product that's desirable that people want, they're willing to pay a lot of money for it. You can sell that product that is based on your idea for a lot of money. And make a lot of profit, and that's a pretty good incentive. To generate an idea. However, There is something That's also true for money, uh, for, for knowledge. And that is that ideas or discoveries are a public good. Now what is a public good? It's non-rivalrous, what does that mean? Can you explain it? Exactly, it doesn't preclude me from using that idea as well, right? It's different from a sandwich. If I eat that sandwich, you can't eat that sandwich. You wouldn't want to eat that sandwich. If I have an idea and I use that idea, your use of the same idea in no way diminishes my use of the of the same idea, nor when you use it and you use it and you use it, right? In that sense, ideas, I think are well described by blueprints because they are just. A recipe of how to do something, and, you know, open a cookbook that tells you how to bake a cake. Just because. The person on the 1st house of the street is baking the cake, doesn't prevent the person in the 2nd house in the 3rd house, and the 4th house with the same cookbook to bake that cake, right? They've got the knowledge now. Um, So That means that And then, and then, yeah, OK, so that, what does that do? Well, that means that once the ideas out there, it's extremely attractive for someone else to take that idea and to use that idea. It's, and it's particularly attractive because they don't have to incur the cost of generating the idea in the first place. Right? If I spent years developing an idea and now I. I announced that idea or it's embodied in a product. Alright, then someone else can come along and maybe just. Open up the product and see how this is what's done, this is, this is the idea that's embodied in that product, I'm gonna do this, just not, I'm gonna do exactly the same thing. Um, and I don't have to develop the idea and incur the cost associated with it. So If that's the case, if an idea can quickly be taken by the competition, and then the competition of course drives down your profits because they can charge a much lower price than you can since you have to recoup the costs associated with development. If uh if someone can easily take your idea. Then you in turn don't have much of an incentive to generate an idea in the first place. So you can clearly see that there is a tension there. So how have Market economies, industrialised societies mostly try to resolve that problem. Sorry, patents, yes, exactly. So what does a patent do, essentially? It protects your invention. It prevents others from using that invention, not physically but legally, right? You you put a legal boundary there, so you are essentially legally through the legal system and now once again you can tell why it's important to have strong institutions right through the legal system you give the inventor temporary monopoly power over that idea. An inventor with the patent is a monopolist, a legally created monopolist or legally sanctioned monopolist. But we have also learned that right, going back to Econ 1101, we've also learned that monopolies are inefficient. They charge too high a price. They don't produce enough of the goods, right? The sum of consumer surplus and producer surplus is not as high as it could be. Does that all sound familiar? Yes, mm. So we've gotten here, on the one hand, we want to give inventors an incentive to invent. They need to be able to recoup the costs associated with the invention. On the other hand, if we give the inventor monopoly power, we're creating an inefficiency. There's a trade-off there. And so there is arguably something like an optimal patent length, right, how much monopoly power do you want to give an inventor? Does anyone know what the standard patent length is for industrial products? Based on sort of US patent law. Close, 17, right? So that's, that's true for A lot of goods. There have been some analysis, not so much recently, it sort of goes in waves, about 1015 years ago there were a few studies sort of looking at what the optimal patent was and patent length and. My reading of the literature was that. There was broadly a consensus that probably the optimal patent length is somewhere around 1011, 12 years. In other words, less than the 17 years that that firms have now. Now, obviously the problem is that this is an average and it's gonna be very different for different kinds of products or product classes, right? So a drug company. May only need 8 years patents to justify the uh the research and development costs whereas another. Uh, I don't know, another company is producing something else. We'll need a longer patent length or so, so that that's, that's a, that's a gross average, um, but you can see what you can see the tension there. So, um, the other thing that we, that we then typically assume in these endogenous or new growth models is that returns to knowledge don't diminish so we don't have this diminishing returns feature like we do with physical capital, but instead returns to knowledge tend to be reasonably constant, um, which is again related to the public good aspect um of. Of uh Of knowledge um and in fact uh it it could be that the returns to knowledge capital are actually increasing and not diminishing because you can imagine so the IT revolution, it becomes much more useful for me to use a computer and IT knowledge if everyone else is using it as well because the interactivity and the network effects that that that are created. So As I said, we're not going to go through a formal model, but this is a schematic of the basic structure of how many of these endogenous growth models work, so you can get a feel for it and and develop a little bit of intuition. You, you can start over here where you. Uh, you, you have some kind of innovation, generation of new ideas, what does that do? Well, it can either generate new and better techniques, in other words, a more efficient way to produce existing products. Um, or it can lead to new and better products themselves. Uh, new and better techniques typically mean that. You can free up resources to use in different ways, you might just use them as more leisure, say, um. Which of course is everything else. Welfare improving because you're producing the same amount of goods but with less inputs, so that's gotta be good. Um, the new and better products. Are going to lead to more consumption goods and services, which we normally think of being better as well because, you know, if, People didn't want them, they wouldn't buy them, um, the new products, um, in any case, probably because of this disruptive process that growth entails, we often get new firms springing up and old firms, uh, faltering, uh, that that is going to have an immediate effect on the labour market as well and the kinds of jobs that are created, um, all of that together typically uh is going to lead to a higher standard of living, everything else equal, um, but. Human beings being the way they are, are never really fully satisfied, at least that's what the last 300 years have taught us that may change, who knows, um, but with the desire to want higher standard of living and incentives in place, the innovation process continues and so it goes right. That's A common structure of these endogenous growth models that then try to explain well exactly what incentives are required right so depending depending on what the question is but a model might really try to drill down and understand this arrow here exactly what are the incentives that that that generate innovation or exactly how does innovation lead to new and better techniques or how does innovation lead to new and better products and so on. Um, but they fundamentally have, uh, some variation of this, um. Of the schematic going on. So If we have some understanding of how endogenous growth works, how TFP changes over time, how countries become more, Technologically advanced, that then invariably raises a question of, Is there anything as policymakers that we can do to put a country on A higher growth path. How do we actually what do we do as policy makers in order to enable innovation and and greater technological progress? Well this is much easier said than done. We have some ideas, but they are fraught. So there are a couple of suggestions for achieving these objectives. I have 3 here, but um, But they're not. Yeah, like I said, they're, they're easy to write down and, and not easy to implement because they also come with with unpleasant side effects often. So the first one is to stimulate saving. Why stimulate saving? Well, to the extent that investment relies on. External financing and some of that financing is gonna come from households and firm savings, if you increase the pool of funds that are available, some of those funds at least can go to. Generating more ideas, right? Some of it may go to an increase in capital accumulation and some of it may go into uh direct investment and research and development. You know, one way to do that might be, for example, through tax incentives. Remember that. Why might this, right? Economists are normally very cautious about subsidies or tax incentives. Why might it be justified though to do this? Perhaps think about this as the following. Stimulate research and development as a second possible avenue, so rather than just trying to target the amount of funds available, but change the incentives with which or how to use those funds. One way to do this might be for governments to subsidise or directly fund basic research and development. Why might they want to do that, again, normally we think in economics of subsidies as being problematic. Under what conditions might subsidies make sense? Well, when there is a market failure. Right? What are the conditions for market failures? Say public goods, right, the existence of public goods or externalities. A public good is essentially good with just a moment, is it good with externalities. If there are, if there's a good with positive externalities, too little of it is being produced. And so a subsidy can help bring it closer to where it should be. A good that has negative externalities, I mean this is just microeconomics, right, this, none of this should be new in any way. A good with negative externalities is being produced. Or there's too much being produced of it and therefore tax, so-called Beguvian tax. Ought to be able to reduce production of it to a more efficient level. Um, and it's this public good nature of knowledge. That means that probably not enough of it is being produced. That may Justify Government action here through subsidies or direct funding. That is why, for example, a lot of universities and certain research institutes are are public or at least partially public. You had a. Yeah I was pretty. Something Yeah, so It's, yeah, so research and development, right, has, has, has public, um, has these externalities. Now there's plenty of research and development that does take place within private companies. But it's often different kinds of research and development, so basic research, the stuff that that is not quickly. Commerciallizable, you know, where you, where an invention is not quickly translatable into a product that makes money, that tends to be done in universities, um, and much less so in, in private firms. Um, so there is some tension as well about what kind of research universities should do, what kind of research we should leave to firms to do. Cash strapped universities have have an incentive to cooperate with the industry, um, but then that means that they're probably doing research that is closer to what the industry wants and less what's optimal from society's point of view and again that's, that's, that's a sort of interesting question of how to go about this, um. Another Another thing that we can do in order to improve Growth is Essentially to try to deepen markets and, And allow for returns to scale. And one easy way to do that is to open up markets and allow for international trade, which of course, Sounds like a funny thing to say in the current world where. All signs are that it's going in the opposite direction. Um, but why is, um, why? Now what's the great thing about having large markets and international trade? Again, I can't write this down so I'm gonna. Be doing some hand waving Suppose you've got two countries, countries A and Country B. And they are, and they all produce the same good and there are 10 firms in country A and 10 firms in country B, and they do not trade with each other, so there is a hard border between them. So this is what? You know, Trump's dream here, OK? Um. How they're all producing essentially the same group. How many firms in total are producing this good in the world? 2010 firms in country A, 10 firms in country B. How many competitors does each firm have in each country? 9, correct. OK, now suppose we tear down Trump's wall. We've got completely free trade. And in each country, the 3 least efficient firms. Die out, they fold. So now we are left with how many firms in total? 14, so fewer firms servicing the same size market, essentially, right? How many competitors does every firm now have? 13, right? So you have each firm operating at a larger scale but more competition at the same time. That's why big markets are so useful and why we often think of international trade as being, being useful. Um, Right, well there are other things we could do, right, we could improve the quality of education, of course, uh, you'd think that more educated people are likely to come up with better ideas as well, um, and so on. So anyway, this is, uh, It is kind of loose loose thinking, there, there is no, There is no snappy cookbook recipe approach to raising a country's productivity rate. I mean, if, if there was. Our Leaders presumably would do that, right, they would adopt those policies, but. But they're really hard, um. You have to think about incentives, you have to think about side effects, uh, interaction with the rest of the world, and there's, there's just no, no simple uh way forward. So we have, I think a much better understanding now of, What Drives economic growth and what kind of conditions need to be in place roughly for economic growth to take place. But um, But we still don't have a clear idea of. Of how to Which levers to pull in an economy or to turn or or uh in in in in order to boost productivity growth, right? That's, it's, it's, it's hard. OK, so this pretty much. Wraps up what I have to say about economic growth. Obviously we could spend another couple of semesters just talking about economic growth. There's a lot of uh material there much to unpack, but this is a principles course so I'm really just primarily focused on giving you an overview and uh initial insights. This also more or less concludes our long run. Our our long run chapters, right? um. Going forward, we're going to have a couple of chapters now. That I would say bridge the long run and the short run, and particularly we're gonna talk about money and capital markets, and then we're gonna talk about the labour markets, and then we're going to move to business cycle analysis or the short run. I've got a couple of slides here that just try to explain how the short run and the long run are linked. The idea is a very simple one. We imagine everything that we've discussed so far. Everything related to the long run as, pretty much defining what a, Sustainable average path is going to look like. Or could look like. So we're not concerned about The swings around that long run path, we we imagine as being kind of an an average, right, and we call that level, that average level, that long run level of output, we call that potential, potential output. Now this is sometimes a little bit misleading to people who have had no exposure to economics because the term potential seems to suggest, That it's some kind of maximum, that's how we typically use potential, right? Uh. I might tell my 10 year old son on the football pitch, look, you're not playing up to your potential, right? So that means that he should be trying harder, whatever, um. Potential here really, you know, think of it more as a kind of average, in particular, actual output can be above potential just as much as it can be below potential. So think of potential as being a long run sustainable level of output. Determined by all those factors that we just discussed in the past couple of weeks in our growth models, right? That's. It's, it's a kind of theoretical counterfactual, if everything was hunky dory, if there were no shocks to the system and so on, um, you would have this long run sustainable level. The reality of course is different. In reality, output does fluctuate. Sometimes it's above potential, sometimes it's below potential, and that is what we're trying to understand in the second half of the course when we do business cycle analysis. How do these fluctuations happen, what determines them, how easy is it for those fluctuations to be reversed? Is there a role for government policy to intervene in order to reduce those fluctuations and so on, right? But um, But that is essentially how we link the long run to the short run. It's not, it's not an innocuous assumption by any means. I don't really want to get into the the the technical issues associated with that. I mentioned it briefly in the first week. But um this is the setup that we'll we'll be running with, OK? Right. Um, I went a little bit over. Um, I, I'm not finished for the day though. Um, so can we take a seven-minute break and reconvene and then we will start with the next slides. Thanks.
