SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Uh, good afternoon once again. Welcome back. Set of slides, topic. A business cycle theory. Um, before I continue, are there any questions from I said that I was a bit frustrated because document reader didn't work. Um I would have put a few things. Uh, on paper, let me just. One thing quickly here as a way of explaining why we have shifted over time in monetary policy from quantitative uh targeting to essentially a price target, you think about the money market. Right. And broadly draw this. As so, sorry. Once again, there's an issue about it not letting me. The other notebook here. Um, and so we've got the quantity of money here. And the price, of course, on the y axis we always do. Now what is the price of money? How do we normally define the price of? The interest rate. Why can we think of the interest rate as the price of money? Uh, it's The return On what? That's right, is that a price? So, hold on, a price is something that I have to pay in order to. So I've got a $100 bill, OK. I'm thinking about whether I should hold 2 or 3 or 4 or $500. OK. Does the interest rate be? My willingness. That's what the It really is, right? here Because we, sometimes we're a little bit loose. Certainly have not What we mean by money. Remember, money is very specifically. Thing that we For certain functions. So what way does Interest rate I am old. Correct, so it's an opportunity call. Interest is turn on. Everything other than money. The opportunity, interest rate goes up, and I'd be and at the margin, I'm better off. Not holding money, but holding my wealth in some other interest bearing form. So the interest rate essentially becomes opportunity cost of holding money. Now, there are For some variations to this, um, or some nuances. Sorry, it's hard to write here. Um Because to the extent that. Savings accounts, for example, are also considered part of broad monetary aggregates and some of them. Also Pay interest, I then really, perhaps we shouldn't just put the interest rate there, but we should put the market interest rate minus the deposit interest rate that I'm able to get on my money balances, but Fundamentally there's still going to be some. Some opportunity cost, right? If there was no opportunity cost. Then essentially there'd be no difference between something like government bonds and money. One of the key differences is that government bonds pay an interest that's higher than money. So demand we normally assume to be downward sloping, right? So that would be money demand. And what about the money supply? Well, if we assume for the moment, forget about. The idea that it's commercial banks that are actually Uh Determining the money supply, but let's assume that it's. Generally under exogenous control. If something is exogenous. And it doesn't specifically relate uh or or respond to the price, then we typically All that Oh As vertical supply curve, right? So, in this case, if the money supply is under control of the central bank, for example, the central bank can Move the supply curve to the right, it can move the supply curve to the left as it deems necessary for the purposes of its monetary policy objective or whatever other objectives it's pursuing. Now, if it's targeting a certain amount of money, which is what monetarism sort of did in the experiment in the late 70s, early 80s, so it was essentially targeting some kind of level of money supply or rather money supply growth. Doing this in level terms now. Changes Then What happens To the interest rate, well, it's clearly going to be determined by the intersection of the demand curve and the supply curve. But one thing. But market participants and policy makers and economists found out very quickly, which they perhaps underestimated, was that money demand is really volatile. It shifts around a lot. Because there is continuous desire by market participants to readjust their portfolios, sometimes they move into cash, out of cash, and so on. And when money demand is very volatile, and money supply is reasonably fixed, or doesn't change much in the short run, what happens, the interest rate becomes very volatile as well. And financial markets don't like that. That means it becomes less. Easy to plan ahead, to plan forward, um, and, and so that was deemed to be quite damaging to the financial markets overall. So of course the alternative then is you really care about having reasonably stable interest rates is rather than targeting the quantity of money you target the price and that's essentially what central banks have done over time you can think of this really as kind of horizontal money supply curve. Where you fix the interest rates. Now, if the money demand curve is bouncing around, then that means that the central bank has to endogenously accommodate those changes in demand by changing the supply. And it does that essentially by having What we call window operations. In other words, it's just. The standing facility, right? If a bank wants to borrow funds from the central bank, it has the right collateral. Willing to accept the terms, then the central bank is essentially willing to provide as much liquidity as any commercial bank wants. Not going to stand in the way just because it feels like, oh, you know, this is more than what it was yesterday or whatever because they have no quantity targets. They're focused on maintaining the, the price. So, that is essentially one of the main changes that's occurred. Why monetary policy is operated not just operationally but also philosophically, right? The central banks are targeting interest rates and the way we think about how monetary policy operates is very much with The idea in mind that the instrument is the interest rate and we are not really fussed about quantity. That causes its own issues, causes its own problems, because if For example, the banking sector itself creates a lot of money in the process. Which we do not have direct control over as a central bank. Well then it could very well be that the money supply rises a lot and perhaps too much than what we're really comfortable with, and that may then say fuel an asset price bubble. Because all that extra money that money that's slushing around financial markets then just pushes up the prices of assets. Even though perhaps. So the CPI inflation inflation rate for goods and services doesn't change much. So those are some of the some of the issues that uh that economists are grappling with at the moment, but overall there's not much disagreement amongst the vast majority of economists that targeting the interest rate is a better approach. Compared to targeting money supply quantity. Was everyone clear about that? All right. So, I want to now spend. Uh, a few minutes on just a couple of extra additional. Topics. Um, We've seen At those charts that correlate money growth with inflation. We've seen a tight relationship between. what 70 years ago. And this led Milton Friedman to this very famous quote that Because Inflation is always everywhere. Basically trying to shut out all the other ideas or thoughts or theories of what drives inflation. For him, it was very clear. Pren too much money, you get inflation. Inflation is often everywhere a monetary phenomena. OK, hold that thought. Oh Let's think a little bit about. How governments operate. So folks switching away from Monetary authority alone. Let's think about how Treasury operates. Government. They too have a government budget constraint that they have to. So, for simplicity, let's assume that there's a certain amount of expenditure spending that the government has. For all these uses. That could be in the military or building bridges or Whatever it is. We don't know where they come from, we're just treating this all exogenous. And now governments. But it doesn't really So If has to. Somewhere In order to pay for it. Where does it obtain its resources? Well, obvious one. those tax revenues, they finance their government spending. Well sometimes governments don't. because they may not find taxation politically. Or it may actually be. So then what do governments have? What Versus Finance Hi, sorry? What about goals? I Yeah, OK, um, which is just another way of saying that they might borrow, right? They might borrow. OK And they might borrow the fund. So the way this is written here is type B is the stalk of bonds. And the change in the stock of bonds. Soccerbos is a stop there. Change in the stock of bonds is low variable as That's borrowing. So Delta B is a change in the bonds. That's not to borrowing. So the government can Not just tax today, but it can borrow. Funds In order to finance its spending today. All within one period. But sometimes it doesn't have the ability to borrow either. Now if it doesn't adjust or. taxes borrow anymore, especially if it has borrowed a lot already, cause then wider public. to government. If So if they cannot tax or they cannot borrow anymore. That's the final Good. Uh, the government having Monopoly issuance power over money, at least over the printing press. As that beautiful advantage of essentially able to turn on the printing. Take that piece of paper out of the printing press and being the first spend that money. Economy Wouldn't we all love to be able to do that? Um But this is not a free for all, right? Because what happens when the government earn more money. Con The value of the money will go down eventually. Um, So, how does How does the value of the money go down? Well, prices. right? Have inflation. OK, so who loses in response to inflation? Consumers, if their income does not. Uh, but Um, Anyone who basically income that is not. Anyone who's holding acids. That are denominated in nominal. So, so who's who's benefiting? Government Who is losing out? Parts of the public What do we call the transfer from the public. Government All the attacks, right? Um, and what about bonds here? So government borrows today, at some stage it will have to. That de How does F Yes OK, if it, if it, no, no, OK, and you're about it's about inflation for the moment, so yeah, forget about inflation. Um, if it actually. I And it's just monetizing it. about the Some taxes, right? Some taxes, taxes in the future. So how does the government finance I Axis, Axis. The only way it somehow has to Resources from the public doesn't. G. Right, but the government doesn't. Relies on extracting resources from the public and private sector in order to. Of course it could also try to adjust gene, but that may for political reasons. And so you can often think of this, of course it's But it's often not bad of you to think about this. So But they may run out of so-called space A Um, and so, and uh, Borrowing, there are limits to borrow, so the last resort often. So, Following on several decades after Milton Friedman. Well Tom Sargeant. Famously said, the end of every. Hyperinflation Always in everywhere a fiscal. End of every hyper. Always Was he contradicting Freedman says inflation is always a monetary phenomenon and now. Now sergeant is coming along and saying, well, actually, basically. OK, very good. So what Sargeant is saying, yes, ultimately, of course, so it's not not a. Oh, and yes, we understand that. excess amounts of money is going to lead to inflation. The question is why do governments resort to the briefing. It's obvious that higher rates of inflation. Or Governments turn to the printing press as they have no other means. Um Sargent's quote is. You know the times a bit. Uh, in the context of many of the fiscal. Also So if you can't get your fiscal house in order. You have no hope really of getting the inflation rate. Remember that this typically applies for central banks that are not fully. So that's why that's why economists often are in favour of. Thanks. Because it basically severs a tie here, forces government. Legally To Adjust either T or B or G in order to If I just. Takes that option away from them. But in weaker governments, weaker. Uh with weaker institutions. That may not be possible. Or perhaps very autocratic. S Be in Turkey for President Erdogan. Taking But many economists would consider to be undue influence over the central bank and its policy. And Donald Trump boundaries of what's Uh Oh OK. One about that. So When we have really high rates of inflation, they, so, and this is what we would expect when when governments are really no longer able to tax. They've exhausted their ability to borrow, they've turned to the printing press. That's when we end up. There are some fascinating historical examples of very high rates of. There is an arbitrary definition. Of hyperinflation, hyperinflation is Coined by 50s is simply defined, like I said, the arbitrary defined hyperinflation to be equal or. Place when you got an inflation rate of 5. Or more per month. Um And so here are a couple of examples of hyperinflation, you can see just Thousands of cents of inflation you get. Uh, those situations, and it should be pretty clear that These kinds of episodes are damaging to the economy, and if you don't believe me, then hopefully this will. Quickly into you. Working Of course.

SPEAKER 2
And with the stroke of a pen, there were no more trillionaires, quadrillionaires, or quintillionaires in Zimbabwe. This followed the slashing of 10 zeros from the Zimbabwean currency by the central bank. The redenomination of the currency meant that $1 trillion turned into just $100 100 billion dollars into $10.10 billion dollars into just a dollar. The move was aimed at curbing hyperinflation, but it appears it has had no effect on the economic disaster in the once prosperous Southern African country. The rate of inflation continues to skyrocket. The Central Statistics office in Harare puts the inflation rate at 11.2 million%, the highest in the world. Experts believe it could be much higher. But just what does an 11.2 million% rate of inflation mean? In Harare? They call it the our economy. Prices of goods change by the hour. It has been a gradual increase in prices of goods. In November last year when the governor of the central bank slashed off 3 zeros from the currency, a loaf of bread, and other basic commodities cost a few $100. By December you needed hundreds of thousands of dollars to buy a bread. By January, a loaf of bread and things like tomatoes were costing millions. By April it was billions. The old currency will still be in use until the 31st of December. Supermarkets have to quote each item in both currencies until the end of this month as Zimbabweans try to adjust to the new figures. A cash shortage has gripped Zimbabwe after the central bank set a withdrawal limit. Individuals and companies are allowed to withdraw 300 Zimbabwean dollars a day. That's just $1. For now, Zimbabweans are welcoming the convenience that comes with dealing with smaller notes and figures as they peg their hopes for economic recovery on talks between the ruling ZANU-PF and the opposition Movement for Democratic Change.

SPEAKER 1
So I think it makes it pretty clear that hyperinflation is super damaging. Uh, the economy, um. Remember we talked about. Classical dichotomy yesterday. So we had our quantity equation of money. Where Mx V is equal to P Y. And what is the classical dichotomy or alternatively monetary neutrality tell us? It says that if you change the money supply, all you're going to do is change prices, but you're going to leave output Y unchanged the velocity as well. So, do you think that in Situation where you have an environment where you have hyperinflation, the classical dichotomy holds. Absolutely not, right? I mean, that is if you ever need an example where the classical dichotomy does not hold, it's when you have hyperinflation because clearly these incredibly high rates of inflation wreak havoc with the economy and lead to a reduction in output. A massive reduction in Now, this was one example, there are many other examples, historically there have been high rates of inflation. These incredibly high rates of inflation are only possible when you have, Otherwise worthless. Paper money that is not backed in any way, because you can just add a few zeros to any bank notes. So we've had hyperinflation in China in the past, um. We had it in Germany, uh, well, Weimar Republic between World Wars, um. Here's one for 1 trillion marks. You've even had situations like this one here, where the printing, the, the, the official printer for When I printed money. And by the time they were going to put the money onto the truck. Like wherever, you know, delivered to the banks or whatever, they decided it actually wasn't really worth it anymore. So they just took the paper again and printed over it. I printed a higher denomination note over the, over the original one. so you got these overprinted notes. Uh, this is arguably the largest banknote ever issued that we know of. This is in Yugoslavia. Um, and if you are interested in delving into the history, you can see that the highest recorded. Inflation rate ever was in Hungary in 46 or 2. Note there that the highest monthly's peak highest inflation rate monthly. But monthly was 4 times. It's pretty clear that an economy doesn't function. That way, right? Now, they are anomalies. We don't see them too often, thankfully, um, but they are instructive, right? I mean, it's useful to study these pathologies to understand the nature of generally, just like as doctors, we're interested in understanding why. Why the human body gets sick, um, so that we can hopefully prevent. Like OK, now. Importantly, When we think about why inflation is damaging, um, we need to perhaps also. Make a further distinction. Between expected inflation and actual inflation. What is particularly damaging is unexpected. Because, as I said in a previous example, Just before Suppose you were to wake up tomorrow. And the price of everything had doubled. enterprise of We would be no worse or better off than we were before. I or whatever materially nothing has changed. And there are examples such as Israel. Triple digit inflation rate. But actually, too much because A lot of indexing. all the contracts and the index on inflation was clear that any contract was going to be adjusted on a continuous basis. That didn't seem to be that damaging. Wasn't ideal, it wasn't Not as good as having low rates of inflation, but it wasn't as damaging as you might expect otherwise from just looking at the high rates of inflation alone. So one of the key differences there is that. With indexation, you essentially are anticipating the inflation, it's expected, whereas damage that comes from inflation. Primarily is when it's unexpected. In other words, when the inflation rate is much higher than what you thought. For what the what the public thought. Um So Why, why is that? Remember what the main, the main cost of inflation was that we identified? was basically that it changes the relative. Because we don't see the prices of everything move and lockstep with one. But when inflation is unexpected, then There are certain prices in the economy that are not moving with the prices that are moving, yes. That Change in relative prices. Messes with the efficiency of the market system and therefore leads to a wider inefficiency. And cost The big one of course is. The one between wages and prices. Wage contracts are often set years in advance. And of course, you wouldn't want to be surprised by Sudden reduction in your purchasing. During the term of that wage. This is exactly what happened a few years ago. For example, to us, University because our wage contract. Settlement National tertiary uh. Education Union and the university are set up to 4 or 5 years in advance. Of course, no one foresaw inflation that happened in 202. So during those years, our real purchasing power went down dramatically because no one anticipated. Which contract was written No one thought that inflation was going to. was 7 So Again, this is a shift in relative prices, purchasing power falling on account of workers not being able to or the representatives who bargain on behalf of workers not being able to anticipate what the inflation rate is going to be. Um, and this is I guess where There is a lot of debate amongst economists just. How important this is, how much we need to therefore keep inflation in check to avoid. Unexpected inflation eroding purchasing power, at least temporarily. Or are there perhaps also costs associated with single-mindedly focusing your policy on trying to keep inflation in debt or in control? And how do we resolve those possible? So This then raises the fundamental question of what drives inflationary expectations. Any thoughts? So clearly, if it's. If unexpected inflation It's a key issue here. Then it matters whether inflation is expected or not. Which means that we need to understand. How inflation expectations in the public and the private sector are formed. This is a big topic on macroeconomists studying, trying to understand. How people form inflation expectations. for how the macroeconom operates. It also has implications for desirability, efficacy stabilisation policy by government. So how Are inflation expectations actually form? How would we model this? Well, there are, once again. Well trodden battleground Ionymous. Assumptions that we make about how people One hand You have economists who argue, well, people are not very smart, really. Pretty hard trying to understand how the economy works. So, a reasonable assumption is example that you just Look at what the inflation rate was past period for which you have data, right? I mean published. So, and then you just extrapolate. Pres That is what we call adaptive. Basically just simple backward-looking formula. Yesterday's inflation rate. and assume that. Next inflation rate. Yeah, you may be wrong a little bit, but. The other argue that. Probably inefficient continuous forecast. Well For example, there's upward trajectory, it will. Under forecast. What inflation is, and that seems silly because it suggests that people do not learn. So the other Now microeconomists argues, no, no, people are actually very smart. They take all the relevant information into account. They understand what's going on. On And they Optimal forecast So they are entirely forward looking, whereas adapted. Backward looking The alternative assumption is that they're forward looking. rational That battle is still going on, macroeconomists, how we. We assume that people are Some form of adaptive expectations or are they forward looking and have some form of rational expectations? And as you might suspect, Given that these are essentially two polar extremes. There's probably also something in between. And that is where a lot of the current research is. Acknowledging that people are a bit more sophisticated than simply assuming that the inflation rate is today is gonna be. That is, that is very simple. That But they're not as smart as actual expectations people argue, because it is really hard. To forecast inflation properly. Um, so there's something in between, right? They are to some extent forward looking. They're trying to make an effort to learn, but they do so in an imperfect way. So there are now a range of theories sit somewhere in the middle. Untimely back Hopefully we can get a better understanding of how people form expectations because we understand how important it is. Able to model Properly. of The fundamental problem, of course, is that this is a psychological thing, right? Happens in people's heads. How do we look inside people How do we verify our theories? Work that's interesting So you can start. Laboratory work. Uh, field surveys. data Different approaches to how to get at this. But it is obviously very difficult because this is essentially something psychological that we're trying to uncover. And not looking to Inside people's Everyone clear about that? We will, when we talk about business cycle theory in a couple of weeks. We will revisit the issue of expectations again because it really is crucial and it is once again at the centre of some of the key macroeconomic debates, and to which we assume that people are forward looking or the private sector is forward-looking as opposed to. Um, I mentioned something about the wage price spiral. Just like to say one more thing about About deflation, because we've always talked about inflation. Um, we can have costly. But one might then be led to believe, OK, well, why not have. Inflation is such a bad thing. Let's just turn the dial all the way the other way. And a deflation, falling prices. Um Economists are often More worried about deflation are about inflation. Why is that? Sorry, sorry, what? Uh-huh, OK. I decrease. OK, so that's, that's, that's one aspect, exactly, um. People anticipate, say consumers anticipate that prices of goods want to buy are going to fall. That's what deflation means. They may hold off with the purchase of those goods. Wanting to take advantage of lower prices future. But then that may just become self-fulfilling because if everyone's holding off the purchases today, that means demand falls today and so prices are going to fall today and that's it's gonna be self-fulfilling. Person cycle. people hold off even further with. Um The evidence for that is not super. And that's really why we force uh. The But there is another important aspect of deflation. So for any, for any given level of inflation or deflation. At any point in time in a In a deep Developed capitalist system. Have Big web of. Extracting claims, in other words, a lot of debt. Now with inflation, who benefits inflation, who benefits? creditor or the debtor? Debtor, right, with inflation, debtor benefit. They borrowed. A certain amounts have to pay back. Amounts that is not worth less. So they benefit Predator lose The deflation back on the opposite, better. Loss, they have to now repay their loan money that is worth more than it was when they borrowed it. But guess what? Most debtors. Don't have a lot of money, but they borrow in the first place. Their balance sheets are fragile to the. And so you can end up in a situation where when you have deflation. Because the debtor is hurt and they need to repair their balance sheet. They retrench Some of the firms and for example, may go under. I'm just focusing on the firm side on by the household. Some of those firms may go under demand follows as a calls as. Firms rupt. That fall in demand then fuels even further deflation, another round of falling prices means that even more debtors are going to lose, and so on. Um, this is a story that Irving Fisher had in mind when he was thinking about the Great Depression, uh, this so-called deflationary spiral or debt deflation trap. Self-fulfilling adverse or vicious cycle where falling prices, debt defaults to bankruptcy fails and deductions falling. So many economists, especially if they are tuned to lessons. Great Depression are At the margin, probably more concerned about deflation and setting off this adverse cycle than they are about small rates of inflation. That's arguably one reason. I have asked yourself this. Why doesn't the RBA target Why do we I Well, one reason
