SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
All right. Jesus, welcome back everyone for week 10. We're really pressing on now. It's the final quarter of the semester? Jesus. Welcome back everyone for week 10, where we will continue our micro 2 work and we're gonna talk about today we're gonna talk about monopolies. This is a pretty natural continuation on from what we talked about last week. Last week we had our perfectly competitive markets, but the first part of that stuff last week really was talking about that sort of marginal cost equals marginal revenue kind of kind of profit maximisation. And our monopoly firms are still gonna be profit maximising. The big difference between today and last week is of course when we talk about perfectly competitive markets, everything's working really well. Right, we talk about perfectly competitive markets, things are great. Surplus is maximised, profit gets pushed to zero, but that's fine, it doesn't matter, it's not not good or bad, it's a thing that happens, but profit's maximised, average costs are minimised, things are looking really good. Today we're gonna be looking at the final, we're gonna be sort of starting the final part of the course, next week, Friday will be a bit different, but today we, we, we start to move into the final part of the course, which is markets failing, which is that we have our nice market structure and all of our assumptions are quite reasonable and the outcomes aren't surplus maximised, aren't average cost minimised, it's bad things happen, right, that we could do better, right? So when markets failure, what we potentially could. Do about those market failures, right, can the government step in and make things better, and in and also what limitations might we have when we're trying to have our government step in and make things better, right, just because a market has failed, just because there's some level of market failure does not necessarily mean that government intervention is the best option. It might be, it often is, but it might not be. Alright, we need to keep in mind the limitations on government intervention as well as the potential benefits of them. Um, before we do any of that, I want to talk about the major project because it's due fairly soon. Um, so popular media talking about an economic issue, provide a critique of that piece of media, and you want to be throwing intermediate micro level stuff at that. Your draught is due to your peer reviewers on Monday evening of week 11, Friday, Monday at 5 p.m. of week 11. Um, that will probably, given some, given some apparent technical issues which I'll talk about in a second, that will probably go out, you'll you'll be given your reviewers probably on Monday during the day sometime, right, so on Monday you'll be given the reviewers and then by Monday evening you send out your, your review, your, your draught to your peer reviewers. Uh, you'll be assigned two people, there'll be 2 people to review who you who will review your work. When doing the peer review, you wanna make sure that your work has the, I think it's, I've read this somewhere, that's the four C's, right? The work, the review, your, your comments should be constructive, right, they should be stuff that the person can take on board and actually make changes. Comments of this work is great, full stop. It's not useful, it's fine to have as a header, but it's not useful. Feedback, right, you want constructive feedback, you want, the work is great. Also, paragraph in paragraph three, I was a little unclear about what you meant by this thing, maybe you should, you could be more explicit, or, I read the newspaper article and they really hammered hammered this point home a lot, and you haven't really talked about that, maybe you should talk about that, or you should use this modelling or whatever, right, you should be constructive. It should be considerate, right, you don't want to be writing, You don't, you don't comment back, this was a piece of garbage and I hated reading it. I, it's just not useful. um, you consider it for the person's feelings, you should cover everything and you want to be as clear as possible, right? Fairly basic stuff, right? Be use, be, be helpful. Be as help be helpful because you want other people to be helpful to you, and super rationality says that you should behave in the way that you want other people to also behave to you. Um, so you should do those things. Um, Any questions on peer review at this juncture, yes. You just email it directly to the two people. Yeah, there's no, there's there's no way for us to, well, there's no way that I'm aware of for us to systematically make it so that some so that students can view some students stuff, not everyone's, um, and so we just, and so we just do it by do it decentralised by email. Um, it's the only way that I've figured out to make it work well. You also don't want to run it through turn it in, oh I guess you could avoid that, but yeah, so, no, no, not turn it in, not through turn it in. Question, yeah. Like, sorry, but When we get Everything send it to 2 people like That lets you know If you, the question was, where's the check box to make sure that we know you've done it on time, there, there isn't one, we occasionally get reports from people saying, So, so it's it's up to the peer reviewer I guess, of like, no one sent me the report, and if we get that. My experience from last time is usually around Wednesday, I'll get one or two emails being like, where is it? Um, and, sorry, I'll get 2 or 3 emails saying I haven't got a thing from this person, what's happening, and I'll check, and one or two of those will be someone who's who's dropped the course and we didn't realise, right, who has had no wattle react, no wattle things for, for 6 months and has not submitted anything and they've just shadow dropped, um, so that you get some of those, right, some of its people who have shadow dropped the course, um. And in some cases, and and they have NCNs anyway, uh, and in some cases, people who are engaged and you and I would email them personally and be like, You need to have this done, it's a requirement, um, and they get it and then they do it, um. So no, it's as I said, it's all decentralised, we don't. We don't, ourselves, double check. Thanks. Is there any what sorry, file formats for submission, whatever you're using is fine, don't submit HEICs, I don't know why you would anyway, but please don't submit proprietary file formats that only Mac users can open because lots of us don't use Mac and it's not helpful, um. This is more generally, like this probably doesn't apply here because most of you would be submitting Word documents, I assume. Don't submit do texts. If you're using latex, don't submit your tech files because probably your reviewer doesn't use latex. Um, so PDFs or Word documents would be the normal, but like whatever you're using is fine. OK. For your final cos we don't see them, we don't see them anyway, the draughts. For your final submission, PDF is very, very strongly preferred only because if you're submitting Word documents, sometimes it does weird things, right, so sometimes um the formatting will go haywire and and graphs that you see as being in the middle of the page are actually like off the page and can't be seen. Um, so PDFs for your final submission, but for the draught, whatever's fine. OK. My questions. Cool, um. If doing, uh, sorry, there's there's, you know, most people will do a report, but you're welcome to do a video or podcast if something that's something you would like to do. Most people work individually, but you're welcome to work in groups, that's what you wanna do. If you're doing a video or podcast, keep in mind if you if you're doing video video or podcast for the draught, the normal draught would be a transcript, would be a plan. Transcript. Right, we don't expect you to, to record the whole thing in advance, right, so the normal draught would be a planned transcript. The final report for the final submission, you submit the actual document, you also submit an appendix, a written appendix that includes the transcript, bibliography, it includes a transcript, includes bibliography, includes a um the comments by your peer reviewers and your response to those comments, right, so you still, you still have to include those transcripts. If you're doing, well, regardless of what type of thing you're doing or whether you're working in groups, please, sometime tomorrow, not today for reasons I talk about in a second, fill in the, Project type selection, um, it's under assessments here. It's just saying, it's just asking what's your project type, if you're working in a group, who's your group member, if you're working in a group of 3, who's your other group member, um. Just so that when we do the peer reviewers to make sure that peer reviewers, you know, if you write doing a a podcast, you're being peer reviewed by other people who are doing a podcast, right, cos that just helps grease the wheels a little bit. Um, this is currently not working, please don't use it, I might actually, Can I do it with this? No, it's over here. I might actually hide it. Because there is apparently a technical issue with it at the moment, which I will fix. Tonight, who I will look into tonight and hopefully fix tonight, yeah. You you should be able to resubmit if you can, yes, um, if you're, if you're working in groups, if you're working alone it's fine. There's a technical issue with the, there's been a technical issue with the groups option, um, where it's not saving the group, the student numbers correctly for whatever reason. I don't know why. OK. Alright. Excellent. Any, sorry, I should say, any questions on anything to do with the project. Project, yes. It could be useful to attach the media article with your for for for your reviewers, yes. It's not essential, but if you wanted to attach your media, the media article with your work for the reviewer, that's a good, it's a good thing to do.

SPEAKER 2
Uh, if we're critiquing an article, let's say the article says, uh, economic policy A is shit because of reasons X, Y, can we say. Critique X and Y and they know you've also missed out on or they've also missed out on.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah, absolutely, yes, so you can go beyond what's in the article as long as you are res as long as you are responding to the article as well, you can go beyond it, that's fine. OK. Markets, so as I say, move on to that part of the course when markets fail, fail, when markets fail is broadly speaking, when the equilibrium of outcome is not efficient, right, that's what we mean, that's what we mean when we say the market fails. It's not that the market collapses necessarily, just that the outcome, the equilibrium outcome, the unregulated equilibrium outcome is not efficient. So it leaves some leaves some benefit on the table. Um, so there may be some kind of government intervention, taxes or subsidies, maybe some sort of price controls, but there are other mechanisms that you might do other than just, other than just type of taxes and subsidies and price controls. We're gonna mostly talk about those, but there are others, um, and we also want to worry about limitations that we have on doing these things. Probably the two biggest, one big one is creative out creating what we call perverse incentives, right, so we talk about, say, government healthcare, right, government healthcare is a policy that has a at a on a personal level I strongly support, right, but, but it is a market intervention. Right, you could have the government not do this, and lots of places don't, but in Australia we have a public healthcare system, it's a government intervention because we think the market, the unregulated market is not efficient, um, but there are perverse incentives from this, right, because people are fully insured, you will be less like, you know, if when I go to on the rare occasion that I go to. I've been to America, I'm real careful, right, because if you hurt yourself in America, it's very, very bad. Um, whereas you know, if you hurt yourself here, it's not good, but you, it's, it's not as bad. And so there are these perverse incentives of of being of the moral, there's a moral hazard um perverse incentive here of having having public healthcare. There's also issues around limited information. Right, so, and that's gonna come up in a, we'll see, we'll see a good example of that much later in as we come to the end of the day, um, but there are issues around limited information. If the government was all knowing that they could potentially make this great this this great policy, but they're not all knowing, and maybe the cost of getting the information is really high and therefore not worthwhile, or something along those lines. And we'll talk about various ways that that can happen. That's our, that was our very, very high level overview. Now monopolies, so a firm is a monopolist if it's the only producer or seller of some sort of good or service, simple, simple straightforward thing. It's not to say that it has no competitors of any kind, right, we talk about tap water being a monopoly, it's a utility monopoly. Um, and it, it's a monopoly, right, there's one firm in Canberra at least that provides tap water, water out of the taps it has here, right, but it still has competitions, right, it still has, it still has competitors of partial substitutes, which is, for example, bottled water. If tap water was $100 a litre, People aren't gonna use it, right, they're gonna go and buy bottled water instead, people will use tap water because it's very, very cheap and, Useful, so you, people use it, um. Monopolies are one of the things monopolies have is we have this idea of substantial power to set prices. It's not infinite power to set prices we have at the bottom here because there are those partial substitutes, these things are typically, typically, you know, We need tap water, but a tap water's $100 a litre, you use something else instead. We need shelter, but if rent is unbelievably high, you live in a tent, right, and there are people for whom that is the case, right, there are people who are in that bracket where rent is just so high that you, you just can't. Um, and so it's not infinite demand, we still have demand, we still face a demand curve, we still have a marginal benefit curve, we still have a demand curve, it's just that the demand curve is downward sloping, right, the price will affect how much is sold. Uh, sorry, the price will pay too much is sold, but the firm gets to choose price. It's not like our competitive market where our firm just saw a price, the firm can choose prices, higher prices, they sell less, lower prices, they sell more. And so like all firms, monopolist choose price and quantity to maximise profit in the same way that we've done before, do I have this here here, in the same way that we've done that we did last week. But now we have our monopolist. Sees that entire market demand. They see that entire marginal revenue. They have some kind of marginal cost that they and and this is actually the demand they face, right, and this is actually the marginal revenue they face, different from competitive markets. Competitive markets, the the firm level demand was flat, Monopoly has price setting power. They still face some sort of costs, I do everything in, I do costs in red, they still have marginal cost. It might be flat, but it might not. We'll start off with being not quite flat. They still have. An average cost, right, they still have fixed costs, so they still have average costs and that kind of thing, so we still have average costs. That'll be fine, yep. They're still, they're still um they're still firms with normal cost structures, and so we still have all of our things about cost structures that still hold, which is to say that the marginal cost has to go through average cost at the minimum average cost. That still has to be true cos that's just a fact about cost structures that we covered in the cost structure part of the course. And so this is a plausible structure for what a monopoly might look like. And what does our firm do, our firm maximises profit by setting pri by by choosing the quantity level where price equals where where sorry where marginal revenue equals marginal cost, which is here. They sell at this quantity level. Given that that given that that's the quantity they want to sell at, that's the quantity of goods they wanna sell, the price they're able to charge for that is up here somewhere, PM, the monopoly price. And this is all looking fine. We charge, we we sell QM units, we charge price PM. We have some sort of level of firm profit. It in blue again. This is our average cost. At the monopoly price, which means we have some firm profit. Firm profit is. The quantity sold times the gap times the profit per unit. Which is price. Minus average cost. Of producing at that level, I guess that's what profit is, that's one way of measuring profit is number of units sold times profit per unit. And so our profit is, This little region in here. Graphically is what profit looks like for our monopolist firm. What profits look like from a monopolist family. Any questions, concerns? Issues We're all OK, also micro one. We're all happy, lovely. We also talk about um total surplus, because we wanna, we wanna argue inefficiency here. The fact that the firm, the fact that the pro the the fact that the market firm, the fact that the firm is profitable is not in itself an inefficiency. Right, profitable firm or unprofitable firm is just a a a fact about the result. It's not making a statement about efficiency, efficiency talks about total surplus. Do we have, have we maximised total surplus, have we minimised average cost? We've clearly not minimised average cost, right, if we increase production, average cost goes down. We increased above QM average costs go down, so we've clearly not minimised average cost, um, we've also clearly, hopefully clearly not, maximised Total surplus, because we can do some stuff with total surplus, actually you can get rid of this as well. We can do some things with total surplus where we say well our consumer surplus is, Up in this region We have our consumer surplus up in this top region up here, no. We have our producer surplus. In this bottom region down here. It's different than profit because producer surplus doesn't include, doesn't take account of fixed costs. And of course we have dead weight, and that means we of course we have dead weight loss, right, because the marginal benefit to society of consumption. Is the demand curve, and the marginal cost of society is the marginal cost of production, marginal cost curve, and so we've lost out, On all of this potential surplus that we could have had, But don't, because those goods are just not being produced. Alright, so for the first good. Make one more good, that would be amazing because the benefit of society is up here and the cost to society is way down here, and so all of this is lost social surplus. Making it one more good, the benefits up here and the cost is down here, so we're losing out on all that surplus that we could have had but don't, because the monopoly's inefficient. So we have two levels of inefficiency, one is we have we have dead weight loss, we have total surplus that could exist but doesn't. The other is we've not minimised our average cost of production. Any questions, questions, concerns? Yeah, mostly hopefully, fingers crossed, micro ones off. About half of stay we micro one stuff. We have inefficiency because the quantity produces below the social optimum, lots of producer surplus, not much consumer surplus, some dead weight loss, um, because there's no entry and exit. In the market because it's a monopolist for for for legal re well for because of the way we talk about monopolies, um, not legal reasons, but for because of the way we talk about a monopoly and how we define a monopoly, a monopoly is where there is one firm, and so there's no entry and exits in the long run, and so this firm just continues making profit in the long run. This is stable, nothing changes, sort of the end, right, this market stays inefficient forever. Any questions, questions, concerns? Excellent, that's what we say here. OK, the argument we've made here basically is that the, the monopoly does not produce the first what we call the what we might call the first best outcome. So the first best outcome is the outcome which maximises our total surplus, maximises our welfare, right, this is the the the first best thing we could possibly have, um. We can instead though talk about something like a 2nd best outcome. Right, and so a second best outcome, it, it, the, the definitions for second best outcome vary a lot depending on the circumstances you're working in, um, but second best outcome generally is the outcome which maximises welfare subject to the incentive constraints of the agents within the model. Right, so in this particular case, we need to make sure that each individual consumer is maximising their utility. And each firm is maximising their profit, right, so each consumer is maximising their utility means that the quantity demanded is, is like the demand curve. Is given by the demand curve, so the actual quantity being consumed is being given by the demand curve. We need each phone to be profit maximising, which we said before, is essentially marginal producing where marginal revenue equals marginal costs, we need that to be true, and we need each phone to making, and I should have, I did fix this but didn't didn't upload, non-negative profit. Right, we don't need positive profit as long as 0, making zero profit or more is, is, is fine, so we need profit to be at least 0, otherwise they'd leave the market, right, otherwise you, you just, you just leave, you can always make zero profit by leaving. So our unregulated market, our unregulated monopolies aren't gonna be first best because, Big pile of dead weight loss. Right, so they're not maximising social welfare, but they might, and I highlighted here, might, they might be second best. Right, it might not be the best that we could possibly hope for, but the monopoly might be the best that we can realistically get. It might not, but it might be the best we can realistically get. Right, so when is the monopoly second best? Monopolies are always bad, but sometimes they're better than the alternative, right, and tap water is your is your example here, right? What we're talking about here are essentially natural monopolies, and so we'll go through and we'll do some some work to try to argue for our, for our natural monopolies, right, we have quantity, we have some, Dollars per unit, we keep things like demand and marginal revenue. To make our lives a little bit easier, I'm just gonna have fixed constant marginal cost. Because it makes life a little bit easier. Go Yeah, that'll be fine. Average cost? Average cost is sensible given the, given the constant marginal cost, the average cost makes sense, as in, Where the average cost is minimised, average cost equals marginal costs, there just isn't anywhere where average cost is minimised, so it's accurately true. As before, our firm profit maximises by producing, The monopoly quantity Telling it the monopoly price, profit is positive. What's our main alternative here to to this monopoly? So an alternative that we might have for this monopoly, and I do do this later. The alternative we would have for this monopoly is to take the monopoly and say, no, no, no, no. Monopolies are bad, we're gonna go and we're gonna split you in two. And then there'll be 2 phones, instead of 1. So the option is to split. Split into two firms. So what happens? It's gonna hopefully clearly be an upside and a downside to splitting into two firms, splitting our market into two firms, splitting our monopoly into two firms. What's the potential, I guess the downside is probably might be the easier, what's the downside of splitting our monopoly and having two firms instead of one? Yeah. That will be a downside, I wanna, I want a more fundamental issue than that. You're right, but I want a more fundamental issue than than that. And we split our uh, yep. It's, it is going to increase our cost of production, which is the same, same one as we had similar one that we had here, um, but the issue that I want, the issue I want to push for, I guess, is that if we have one firm, we're paying for one set of fixed costs, and if we have two firms, we're paying for two sets of fixed costs, right, and so in some cases that is that may not matter very much, right, opening up a second website front for your store. Doesn't have a whole lot of fixed costs. Opening up a second electricity distribution network has a lot of fixed costs, right, and so the, the size of that impact is going to differ between different sorts of things, um, but the downside is you have an extra, Extra fixed cost, right, because you now have 2 firms. Paying that fixed cost instead of only one. And that's gonna cause the increase in average costs, that's gonna ultimately cause the increase in average costs that we talk that you that you mentioned and and and as as you say as well. So the big downside is that there's this, you know, each firm is gonna have to pay our fixed costs. What's gonna be the, I guess at the market level, not so much at the firm level, because this is ultimately bad for the firm, but at the market level, what's gonna be the, the upside of taking our industry and splitting it in half, yeah. We're not gonna maximise total surplus, we might get more total surplus, um, but in particular, yep. Yeah, and that's what I want to really focus on is we're gonna end up with more output. Um, which means output closer to the social optimum, which will result in increased total surplus. So these are sort of our two, our two things that might be going on, right? We have to pay this extra fixed cost, which is bad, but we're ultimately gonna get more output, which is potentially good, which is which is good, um, and so whether this is good or bad or not might depend. But if we focus on our particular problem here. Um, we're gonna note some more explicit results. I'm gonna call, I'm just gonna call this Q star cause that's gonna be helpful. Um, I'm gonna note some more explicit results and some numerical results. Um, as marginal cost is constant. The, the, the flavour of these results hold anyway, but the specific values are, are, are true because we have constant marginal cost. Because marginal cost is constant, we know some stuff, we know that this is that the monopolist produces half of the social optimum outcome. Um, as marginal cost is constant. And demand is linear. Right, the specifics, again, the specifics rely on these assumptions, but the, the, the flavour of the outcome is the case anyway. With constant marginal cost and linear demand, um, we know that the monopolist produces half as much as the as the social optimum, and you can kind of see that's because margin revenue is twice as steep as demand. So with marginal you're twice as steepest demand and marginal cost being constant, the, the QM is half of Qtar. We also know from some of our earlier work, from our earlier work on game theory, that if we, if we have two firms in this market facing this kind of work, facing the kind of work from our work on um Bertrand competition, Bertrand compet on corno competition, it's actually corno competition, but I should check that, um, that if we have two firms in the market, each, each firm, Produces a third of the optimal size and the entire market sells 2/3 of the optimal size. So I'm actually gonna call this, sorry, I'm gonna rewrite that. I say Q2 because it's each firm when there are 2 firms produces a third of the total market size and the total market is, well there's 2 firms. Um, and so the total market size is 2/3. Of QStar. Right, this was a tutorial, well, it was partly a tutorial result and partly a partly in class result, right, we had a tutorial result which said when there's, when there's 2 firms, they each make a third of the social optimum, so the total amount is 2/3, when there's 3 firms, they each make a quarter of the social optimum, so the total production is 3/4, and we had that nice limiting behaviour where as you get more and more and more firms, you get closer and closer to social optimum. So what happens if we split this market here, right, and this is where it's gonna be, this is where things are gonna go bad, because if we mandate that this market has to split up, each firm makes, A third as much. Each individual firm is making 1/3 as much. Of the social of the social optimum, making 13, sorry, of the social optimum, so each firm's making 2/3 as much as the monopolists did. What that means is that at each for each individual firm, This is our average cost of production. For each firm. Right, each firm's average cost is way, way up super high. Because they're paying for those mass, which which was your point earlier, because they're paying for those, they're paying that additional fixed cost, right, they're producing a lot, they're producing less, but they're still having the same fixed costs. The average costs are a lot higher. At the same time, the prices they can charge in the market are actually a lot lower, because the market as a whole, Oh, it's about here. Because there's 2 firms, market as a whole is selling 2/3 of the amount of the of the of the amount that's available of um, Yeah, something too, those are the amount. And so the price gets pushed down when there's 2 firms. Right, the competition causes the price to fall, causes each firm to make less stuff, but the total market as a whole makes more stuff. And this is bad, right, this is bad because our firms are making negative profit. In the way I've drawn this, right, the outcome here is that the average cost, For our firms of making two goods. Is larger than the price. That they're able to charge. Which means our profit is negative. And, and, and like this is a duopoly model, if our profit's negative if the best we if the best we can do is negative profit, well then we go out of business. It's nothing else we can really do here. In such a case, we don't really talk about whether one firm or both would go out of business, if you really, if the government mandated there were two firms and there had to be 2 firms, I don't know as the answer to that question. The the situation is not tenable in the long run. I'll say it, I'll say it that way. There, there is no long run equilibrium here. There's a long run equilibrium here. It's not great, but it is an equilibrium in the long run because there's no entry and exit and everything's fine. Um, two firms would not be a long run equilibrium because they're both making negative profit. One firm would if, if there were two firms, one firm would leave. Right, if it wasn't a government mandated thing, one firm would leave and we'd return to a monopoly situation. So profit, so if we try and split this up, it just doesn't work because the increase in average costs and the fall in price that's able to be charged in the market means that our firms make negative profit, and so nothing happens and nothing, you know, we can't we can't sustain 22 firms in this industry. Right, this is a natural monopoly, right, natural monopolies happen when fixed costs are large, um, so that if there were two competing firms, both would make negative profit, and so we just can't have competition in the long run. The market's not big enough to support long-run competition. The ways that you might see this happening is if say demand increases radically, then maybe the market becomes big enough that it is possible to support multiple firms. So we saw that in, um, this is going back a ways now, but in the 90s in Australia in telecommunications, you see that, right, in the 80s, there's, well it's not Telstra yet, there's Telecom Australia, which became Telstra. um and then in the 90s you get Optus, and there's two firms, and now there's, you know, 16 different. Phone companies that you can use to, to, to buy your phone with. There's really only 3, there's really only Optus, Telstra and Vodafone, uh, but there's 3, where there used to be. Um, and that's a mostly a function of the market getting bigger, maybe also fixed costs going down. So Our natural monopolies are these ones, ones where if you try and split them up, our firms become unprofitable. Uh our two new firms were unprofitable. Any questions, concerns? Yeah. As a, as a quick side note, this is being driven by those high fixed costs and by the fact that the monopoly was not making that much profit, so there wasn't enough floating around. If you if you modify this and you bring the fixed costs down by a lot, you could still, you could be, you could be fine, right? You could be fine and it would be good to split the market up, right? So if average costs weren't as I've drawn here, but if fixed costs were a lot lower and fixed costs were so that the were such that our average cost line was like, you know, down here somewhere. Then we're fine, right, because then when you split the market up. Average costs, I'm gonna get rid of this cause I don't want it on the screen still, but average costs are way down here, they're still below the price of the price that that exists in the market with two firms, um, and so that would be, that would be fine, right, you could have two firms, you'd have 3 firms or 4 firms here. Um, so the, the, the, the high, the high fixed costs relative to the size of the market, that's what's driving the outcome here, yeah. You get the same qualitative results, the exact numbers, you know, a 5 and 1/3 and stuff are are different, um, but yes, non-constant marginal costs gets you the same, broadly the same qualitative results. Of if average sorry, fixed costs are really high, maybe you're in a natural monopoly and the best thing to do is to have one firm, because you just can't support two firms. Uh Yes, yeah, yeah, yeah, well, sorry, it, it'll be talkly profit is less than 0% if average if sorry, fixed costs are sufficiently high. OK. Alright. So some some some monopolies are natural, but obviously there are lots of monopolies floating around that, you know, historically and in the real world that are non-natural, right, so when does or should the government intervene in a world where they would be best served by, you know, the, the, the, the baseline level analysis would say you should have more firms, right, you should have lots of firms and the and the market's big enough to support lots of firms and average costs are kind of, oh sorry, fixed costs are kind of low, but the government's gonna step in to create legal monopolies anyway. And so when might that happen, right? If there there might be that there's some overriding public interest, like there's some, there's there's such a massive um, uh, positive externality type of thing where having one firm do everything, Has a public benefit, right, so you know, medical registration for of various sorts and public healthcare, one you might think of that as as a monopoly, maybe that would be more efficiently run by lots of little firms, but maybe not, right, so, oh sorry, this is sorry, medical registration. I mean, here when I say medical registration, I mean something like registering nurses to be registered as nurses or registering doctors to be registered as doctors. There's one body in Australia that registers nurses. Right, there's no special reason why that should be a monopoly, the fixed costs are pretty low, so you'd, you kind of think that maybe you would benefit from having lots of different ones and you just go to the cheapest one and and that'll drive prices down, but there's a public benefit to having one single entity that does this. And so we have one single entity, the government says only this group can register nurses as nurses in Australia, um, similarly for doctors. So some overriding public interest, maybe you do this. There could be long run incentives. Patents are a form of monopoly. When you you invent something and you and you put out a patent for it, what you're doing is you're saying I am the monopoly producer of this good. That's, that's bad, right, monopolies underproduce goods and so we therefore shouldn't have patents. But there's long run questions as well here, right? Um, so we, we talk about long run long run incentives here, in the short run, yeah, you shouldn't have patents. Once the thing's been invented, you shouldn't have patents. They're they're bad, they stifle innovation, they, they reduce surplus, they're a bad thing. The point of them is that their existence, hopefully in principle means that you get more innovation happening. And so there's a, there's a bit of a trade-off there and, and between sort of the the incentive effect of making more innovation versus the um versus the prohibitive effect of not having that innovation available to the wider community for some number of years, and we, we try and trade off those two things, but it is a monopoly that you're producing that's not natural. And these are maybe good reasons, we can talk about bad reasons, but there's still reasons, right, so you talk about corruption or kickbacks. So there's, you know, there's lots of historical ones here, um, the, the, the big monopolies is of course your East India trading companies, um, the Dutch and then the British, um, they're monopolies, right, they're monopoly importers of goods from, from the Indies. At least initially, um, there's no good economic reason for wanting to do this. But the government still did it because they could make a lot of money by having that happen. Governments are still people. Any questions here? Questions, problems? These are things we might see non-nat monopolies anyway, and these are where the government steps in and makes them happen, they wouldn't happen naturally. The government forces it to be the case. OK, for the last 10 minutes, that's not enough time. Um, we're gonna talk about, so we've said monopolies are inefficient, let's talk about ways we can do something about that. Right, the core issue is under provision, we can do some things about that. I'm gonna run through these, some of these relatively quickly, some of them are really, really obvious, but price ceilings are perhaps not so obvious, um, so if, so if we have our, Our demand, we have our marginal revenue. We have our marginal cost, if we have a normal situation of the, the what we just did, right, the monopoly on the producers. If you instead introduce a price ceiling, You could get rid of the inefficiency, right, you could step in and say, well look, we're gonna put in a price ceiling, we cannot charge more than, The marginal cost of production. From the firm's perspective, the firm says, oh, that's annoying, I was hoping to charge that very, very high price, but now I can't charge anything more than this marginal cost of production. And so on each good I make $0 but I'm, you know, I tiebreak on the direction of making goods if, if it doesn't affect me, and so I'll make as many goods as I can sell, and so we charge P C, we produce as many goods as we can sell, we produce the social optimum, isn't everything, Isn't everything grand, right, all of the surplus goes to consumers in this particular instance and none to producers. If you have increasing marginal costs, the producers will take home some surplus, but not necessarily heaps. But I should draw this with a diminishing marginal, an increasing marginal cost to emphasise that point. Producers take home some of the surplus, but not all of it, but, but not that much. This is never appropriate for reasons we'll talk about in a second, but this is something you could do, right, you could put in a price ceiling and you get the social optimum outcome in the short run. You could do subsidies. I'm not gonna draw subsidies causes subsidies are perhaps pretty obvious, right? It's under provision, how do we solve underprovision, we subsidise. We make a per unit subsidy, people buy people buy more of the good, everything's fine. We can do, this is a sort of a weird one, you can allow price discrimination or encourage in some way price discrimination. So as the monopolist, the issue for the monopolist, rather the inefficiency for the monopolist really arises because they're charging everyone the same price, because everyone's being charged the same price, there's incentives for monopolists to underproduce so that they can push the price up. That's that that's that's the idea for them not, that's the, that's sort of in some ways where the inefficiency comes from. So what if, instead, Our monopolist Could do first degree price discrimination, first degree is the easy one to look at, right, which is to say they go to every person and they charge them the marginal benefit of consumption, the marginal utility, marginal benefit, whatever you wanna call it. Well then our monopolists can come along and they can charge the first person. This very, very high price, and because the cost of production is way down here, let's go green, because the cost of production is way down here, they can make a lot of profit off that person. And then they go to the second person, and they charge them their marginal benefit. And because the marginal cost is way down here, they make they make tonnes of profit off that person, and of this person and this person and this person and this person and this person and this person and this person. Until we get to here. Right, until we get to that social optimum, because that person right before social optimum, the benefits here and the cost is down here, they're pretty close, but there's still some benefit to selling to them, to making the good and selling it to them, because we're charging every person a different, a different price, charging everyone the marginal, their marginal marginal utility. And so this fixes seems to at least fix the problem, right, the issue is under provision, we do first degree proscrimination, the issue goes away. In the social optimum quantity is produced. There's other options as well. Any questions on these before we look at issues with these options? Good if we had a bit more time, but we have what we have. Price ceilings. Ideally, would be lovely. What's the big problem here, what's the big problem for price ceilings is that our, because we have relatively high fixed costs. We have our average cost of production. And if we mandate that price ceiling. Our firm's making negative profit, our firm produces the social optimum quantity. But they're making negative profit, so they go out of business next period, and in the long run they have to close. So for price ceilings while we would like to charge it so that it's, it's this social optimum, so that it encourages social optimum production, you can't sustain that in the long run, because our firms would make negative profit. Typically our firms make negative profit. In the case of constant marginal cost, the firm definitely makes negative profit because of the way the cost curves end up. So one issue is you can't just force marginal utility equals marginal cost here, because our firms make negative profit. Another issue is the governments don't, so, so maybe instead, Maybe instead what you do is you do do a price ceiling, but you do a price ceiling here, right, this can be price ceiling prime, maybe you do this as your price ceiling. And then you allow some dead weight loss in order to maintain profitability of the firm. There's a lot less dead weight loss. If you produce at Q Prime But there's still zero profit and so it's sort of OK. What are some issues? All of this idea of fixing your price ceilings at just the right level assume huge amounts of information that the government just doesn't have. Even the individual firm would probably barely have access to, right? Um, the government doesn't know the demand curve for the market, because they're hard things to figure out, away from equilibrium, the demand curve doesn't know the cost of production for the firm, typically, if the firm knows, That the government is gonna set set set um say, If the government knew all this, right, there's incentive issues around gathering information, do I have this here, yes, excellent, um. No, there's two incentive issues. There's one incentive issue of if the government, if the firm knows the government is trying to set a price ceiling so that profit is zero, and the firm, and the government comes to the firm and says, tell us what your costs look like, and we're gonna set our profit, and we're gonna set our price ceilings based on what you tell us. The firm's gonna say, oh, our prices, our our our costs are monumentally huge, right? Cause if the government thinks the costs are really high, they'll set a really high price ceiling and then the firm can make profit. From that, right, so there's incentive issues around lying to the government about your cost structures. There's also sort of longer term incentive issues, if the price ceiling is structured so that the profits always zero, then there's no reason why you would ever do anything to try to make your, Process any more efficient, right, um, if you're a monopolist, if you're a firm normally, If you innovate and make your pro your process more efficient, you get to take home some of that profit. Maybe not for very long because maybe everyone else then also takes on that and that drives down the the price in the market and the consumers benefit, but at least in the short-term you can get some benefit. But if price ceiling just eats your profit to zero automatically, well then there's, why bother? Why bother trying to innovate or or anything like this? Um, And so there's, you know, these are kinds of issues that we would have to think about when talking about price ceilings. Given time, I do wanna rush, I don't want to push through these last couple, um, subsidies have similar sorts of issues, right, there's information issues, to find the optimal subsidy, you really need to know demand curves and production costs, and that has all the same issues as we just talked about, um, have the same incentive issues we just talked about. We also have political issues. The way that you do this in order to, to maximise total surplus. Is as a government you give huge per unit subsidies to these monopolist firms, and that looks really bad from a political economy perspective, right, you can't, as as a government you can't say, well I know there's this big, there's this big monopolist and it's shafting you and charging you really high prices, so we're gonna subsidise that industry, so that they become bigger, right, that that just doesn't work politically. Um, even if the effect of it is to max to to increase surplus in the community, um, so this is a potential issue here. Uh, and, and similarly, it's very costly for the government to do this anyway. Price discrimination, all the usual ones as well, information issues, implementation issues, um, there's also equity issues, and that's kind of our, our new one for this, right, if you allow price discrimination, first degree price discrimination or you implement, are able to implement first degree price discrimination, all of your surplus is flowing to firms, nothing to consumers, and so there is potentially equity issues around this, right? Is that actually, is that actually better if the firm is taking home all the surplus and consumers just get nothing out of this industry. And, and maybe you're happy with that, but maybe you aren't wouldn't be happy with that. There's information issues, um, implementation issues, as you would expect. That's all we
