SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Alright, given the time, we will. Get started even though we have Somewhat less people than usual. Is there a. It's hard to know, but is there a, do we not, cos you got here, do you guys. I have a reason why we have Less people We can, I know I get that we can obviously, but like even went to last week. I was wondering. Big concert in town, people are. Yeah, fair enough. Fair enough. It's the, the bane of the it's the bane of the Friday morning. They had this originally scheduled for 9 a.m. Friday, which I was able to push to 10 a.m. but that's the best I could that's the best they could give me, um, so yes. Um, I'm aware of the, the Friday night, Friday morning being tricky. Alright, today we're gonna be talking about general equilibrium, um, so can you, you know, continue our work, I guess. This is a bit different than this is in some ways a bit different than all of our previous work, it's a bit different than all of our previous work for a couple of reasons, which I'll talk about in just a second here. Basically because all of our previous work has looked at, with some, you know, minor little exceptions, has basically looked at one market, right, we talk about the market for widgets, if we're being general or we put words to write the market for apples, the market for bananas. For our general equilibrium work, but, but obviously when we go and look at the real world, it's not like the only thing that matters for apples is, is the price and quality of apples and the market structure for apples, right, all the other stuff matters as well, right, the qua the the market structure for bananas, sorry, the the demand supply, whatever for market for bananas matter, the demand supply for meat matters, the demand supply for education matters. Every good and service that's out there in the world lives in the same market, right, same consumers buying from that market, it's when you look at producers, it's not like, you know, Woolworths doesn't sell apples, Woolworths sells a whole bunch of different stuff. Um, and so it would be nice if we had some kind of work, some kind of way of talking about this, where we talk about not just one good at a time, but all good at the same time, or I should say every good at the same time. Cause in, in some of our work we have had like apples versus all other goods and we lump everything together as as everything else, um, but, and that's fine, there's there's there's scope for that and that does give us something. But it'd be good to be able to look at the market where we have lots of different goods and recognise that we have lots of different goods, and work with that model. Um, so our previous work looks maybe at some sort of flow on effects, we talk about substitutes and condiments, right, we have talked about the price of rice goes up, what happens to pasta, that kind of stuff. Um, but we've never talked about like a flow back effect, and that's, that is reasonable, right? We, we, we say the price of rice goes. What happens in the market of pasta? Well, in equilibrium, the price of pasta also goes up, but shouldn't that then mean that the price of rice goes up more, which shouldn't that then mean that the price of pasta goes up more, which shouldn't, you know, back and forth, so we do get that kind of flow back effect and I've, I've even used pasta and rice in my thing here, right? Um, and so general equilibrium lets us talk about all of those things all at once, right, so we say what happens if, if the utility for pasture increases or if if consumption, sorry, um, preferences change in such a way that rice becomes nicer for people, what happens in that market for both goods at the same time together. To keep our lives easy, because we like to keep our lives easy, we're gonna work with just two goods, but all of the results, all the formal results certainly flow through to, to however many goods there are in the market, right, to 10,000 goods is the results to hold. Before we do any of our results and talk about general equilibrium models, the assignment, the assignment draught is due on Monday afternoon at 5 p.m. to your peer reviewers. You'll be given those on Sunday. I can't give them to you earlier than that because I want to wait wait till I have as much information from you guys about who you, whether you're, what type of assignment you're doing, whether you're working in groups, like that thing that's online that's asking you to fill in some data, and I'll, I'll, I'll ping everyone to fill that in as well this afternoon. Um, a couple of quick, one of the questions I've seen a couple of times is how complete does the draught have to be, and part of the answer is it's kind of up to you. We're never gonna see the draught, um, as long as you have something, then you can give that to your peer reviewer. But generally speaking, the more complete the draught is, the better peer review comments you're gonna get back. Right, if you give someone something that's, you know, a list of dot points of, you know, I'd like to talk about this, they're gonna be able to give you very little feedback, they're gonna say, oh yeah, that looks fine, I suppose, maybe there's this other thing you maybe could talk about, but I can't really. I don't know what your analysis looks like, so I can't really do anything, whereas if you give a, a proper draught, which is what's kind of the expectation is that you would give a, a draught, like, a completed document, um, maybe you would have a section that says, oh, and I, and I, I know that I really want to talk about externalities, and we haven't done externalities until week 11, so I'm gonna hold off writing that until we've done externalities. Um, that would be, that's maybe fine, but you know, the rest otherwise, otherwise you write it in full, then your peer reviewer can give you really good feedback. I can say. This section made sense, or this section, I see what you're going for, but it needs to be rewritten because it really doesn't make sense, right, you can, you can get a lot better feedback from people, yeah. What's stopping me Um, Academic integrity, I guess, but also they would then have a draught, they would have a, the person you sent a draught to has a copy of your original draught and the person who sent their draught to you has a copy of the fact that they've done that. Um, yeah, um. You would be expected to be using your ANU email because that would be the only way that you have to contact this person, so it's all like, it's all stored on the ANU servers we have, it's all recorded and stuff, that would be. It would be, it will be noticed. If this if this happened, I've never had had the question before, it's never come up as an issue, yeah. Um, otherwise, any issues about, about the, the, the process, I, I guess first off, the process or, or, or things of that nature for that peer review. You'll get an email on Sunday saying who to send stuff to. OK, any other que any questions otherwise about the assignment? In any way. We're all good, we're all clear, we've all chosen an article that we're, we've all chosen our article. Yes, lots of nodding, excellent. If you're not there yet, that's concerning, but if you're there, that's a good bare minimum to have reached. Who's finished their draught? Couple of people, yeah, lots of people actually, excellent, well done. Um, is there any other questions? Alright, we may end up finishing a little early today as well, which is always nice. Alright, so general equilibrium models. So these are not new models, right, um, these were developed, initially developed in the early 1900s. Obviously partial equilibrium models do go back further, but these general equilibrium models were developed by Walra in the early 1900s, and we're gonna make a bunch of assumptions, as we always do, right, because that's cos we're doing modelling, right? We assume that all individuals and firms are price takers, so we're working in those kinds of competitive markets world, um, where both the firms and and consumers are competitive. Um, our individuals and firms are all doing the usual things, they're all maximising utility, they're all maximising profit, and there's no difficulties, right? There's no transaction costs, there's no search costs for information, so no uncertainty, full information, there's no externalities, there's no, there's nothing odd going on in this market. So on Wednesday, the odd thing that was going on was firms had price setting power. We don't have that, right, firms are price takers, consumers are price takers, everything's everything's fine and easy. I say easy, it's not that easy, but like everything's fine, everything's everything's nice. And if we have all of those things, we can talk about a well raising equilibrium, which is a similar concept to what we've talked about before as an equilibrium, right, we talked about an equilibrium in a partial equilibrium sense, was when quantity demanded equals quantity, the price was such that quantity demand that equals quantity supplied, the Walrasian equilibrium and the general. The equilibrium model is the is if the prices are such that all of our markets clear, right, so clear in this context markets clearing means for all of our markets, the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied of every individual good is is the same. This is a bit stronger than we need, but this will work out to be fine. No, this is what we need, sorry. So all of our markets clear. It's just slightly more general idea. This obviously reduces to in the single good case that the one market clears. So you still do talk about raising equilibrium for one market, but you can talk about it for more than one. Any concerns, questions? Reasonably straightforward, excellent. As we always do in all of our market modelling, we want to make sure that we're very, very careful to distinguish between the equilibrium outcome and the efficient outcome, because they are different, they are different concepts, right? Um, they were raising equilibrium is technically speaking, it's just a price vector, it's the price for every good such that the quantity demanded for every good is equal to the quantity supplied for every good. Um, and so that's what our war raising equilibrium looks like, it's just that it's the price vector that tells you that that those things are clear. The allocation that is efficient, we talk about an efficient allocation or a Pareto efficient allocation, because our notion of efficiency is just gonna be Pareto, we're not asking too much, is an allocation of all goods so that no one can be better off without making someone else worse off. And these things clearly, well, I don't wanna say clearly, but like these things are different, right? They, they, they look different, they sound different. One talks about prices. One doesn't talk anywhere in efficient allocation in Pareto efficiency doesn't talk anywhere about the price of goods, it doesn't doesn't matter for Pato efficiency. Um, and the Eurasian, whereas the raising equilibrium does, the raising equilibrium doesn't talk about how well off people are, right, it just doesn't come up in the raising equilibrium, at least not directly, whereas the prior efficiency does. So that they are talking about different things, as we always have, just sort of really pushing home the main concept here, um, we think that markets kind of tend towards equilibrium. And we would kind of like markets to tend towards being efficient. And so if it is the case that the equilibrium outcome is also efficient, then we, right, we, we're happy, right, which we didn't have on Wednesday. On Wednesday, our equilibrium outcome was not efficient, right? Last week our outcome was efficient, it depends on what's what our what what assumptions we're making. OK, big rant there, but that's fine. Um, it, uh, we're gonna look at 2G2 general equilibrium models, first with production, which is gonna be weirdly the easier one, and then without production which strangely is gonna be the harder one to work with, um, but for reasons we'll see, to me at least. Any questions, problems, concerns? Equilibrium over here, efficiency over here, definitionally, they turn out to give the same answer, great. OK. First off, general equilibrium model with production. So as always, we, we, so we, we wanna go generally, we want to go to a general equilibrium model. We want to keep things as simple as we can, we can't have one good, right, if we have one good, it's a partial equilibrium model and then that doesn't give us anything. So we're gonna go to, so we're gonna go to the simplest we can but still actually gives us the problem, which is two goods. You absolutely, as I say, you absolutely can go to more than 2 goods. Um, all of our graphical work collapses immediately if you go to more than 2 goods, but the, but mathematical analysis that you can do on these and that Warra did in the 19 early 1900s, works for more than 2 goods. Uh, we've got two goods, we have one side of the market are our firms, our firms make goods. And they're limited, and uh we're gonna, we're gonna abstract away a lot of our firms, and we're gonna say there's lots of firms, and they take in labour and capital and they spit out our two goods A and B, um, do I have goods for this? No. And they spit out our two goods A and B and, We're not gonna worry, we've, we've done a lot of our work about cost structures and profit maximisation for choosing, you know, input cost cost minimization for choosing your inputs and all that stuff. We're gonna abstract all of that away and our firms are just gonna have a production possibility frontier for the firms as a whole. And that's how we're gonna talk about firms. We'll see that in a second. We're also gonna have our consumer side, our consumers as usual, have utility from consumption. This one's a little less reasonable because there are lots of consumers, obviously out there, um, and so adding up consumers in a way where we add up their utilities is a little bit dodgy, right? You can add up goods fairly easily. If I make 2 goods and you make 3 goods, then together we've made 5 goods. But if I have 2 utdles and you have 3 utilles, then together we have nothing, right, because you can't really do comparisons in that way. But we're gonna ignore that problem and we're just gonna add people together and assume that you can add people together and so ultimately we're gonna just, we're gonna work with a global utility from consumption, right, and so our our global utility from consumption that comes from our consumers consuming stuff um is gonna have, is gonna have all the usual properties for a utility function, right, bowed out from the origin, uh sorry, bowed in towards the origin, you know, the usual sort of shape for utility functions, uh for for indifference curve, sorry. So these are gonna be standard utility functions and we're just sort of by assumption. And so if we talk first about Pareto efficiency, we want Pareto efficiency, an outcome is Pato efficient if it is possible, right, if it is if it is technically feasible to actually make that make that bundle of goods, and if there's no way that we could increase the global utility like to do so. That's our, that's our that's our Pareto efficiency in this model. Any questions on any of these assumptions that we're gonna be making before we see them in action? Sure. Let's talk about our two goods then. What do we want as our two goods? What's gonna be good number one? Travels. Apples measured in 2 tonnes of apples and good number 2. I can meet my eye, good number 2. Oh, come on guys. With no one to his bananas, also measured in tonnes. Fine, we're in a society where these are the only two goods that exist and and that that's fine. We have a whole bunch of firms who are all making apples and bananas. If they all choose to only make apples, they can make a tonne of apples, right, all together. And if they choose to only make bananas, they get a tonne of bananas. But if they're only making apples, making the first little bits of bananas is actually very, very easy, right, it's easy to make a couple of bananas, because, you know, you, you're in Queensland and you're putting in a huge amount of effort to make apples grow because it's too hot, and so instead you'll just make bananas grow and it's super easy and and nothing, no, no issues at all. Um and so if you want to make a couple of bananas, it's, We can get heaps of bananas at a relatively low cost in apples, and similarly, right, if we're only making bananas, we're trying to make trying to grow bananas, trying to grow bananas in Canberra, and it's terrible because it's way too cold, and so we can instead make make a few less bananas, but tonnes more apples, and, and similarly across. The production possibility frontier, or production possibility curve, same sort of arguments you've heard in micro one, which you, when you would have heard in probably the first week of micro one and then also probably in the last, one of the last weeks of micro one as well. Uh, for this production possibility frontier, it's not a great one that I've drawn there, but it'll be fine. We expect it to be burned out from the origin because of those reasons about uh if you're making only apples then you're doing it kind of inefficiently, right, and you can be more efficient by by producing a bit of both goods. So there's there's some gains to specialisation, there's also some gains to to not specialising. So, We can't make anything outside of this, anything, anything out here, I'm gonna get rid of this immediately, but anything out here, this is just not technically feasible. And so when we're talking about Pareto efficiency or equilibrium or anything like that, nothing out here is ever gonna be considered Pareto efficient because it's not technically feasible. Right, we just can't make that much stuff, and so it's silly to talk about those things. These things are impossible to create. In a similar sort of way, anything in here. Anything strictly inside the production possibility frontier is kind of obviously going to not be Pareto efficient if we're focusing on efficiency. It's gonna clearly not be efficient, but for a different reason it's not efficient because we could easily necessarily do better, right? Anything that we're producing in here, if we, if we are producing, you know, this bundle of goods, that many apples and bananas, then we could instead just make, More apples and more bananas, and we are definitely better off as a society because we just have more, cos we have more stuff. We could have done this and we didn't. So this was anything inside the PPF is is silly. And so if we're talking about efficiency, the only things that are relevant or interesting to us are the things on the PPF because they're possible and they're not necessarily best, but they are they're the only ones that we have to think about, they're the ones that are potentially the best. OK, any questions there, questions, concerns? Lovely. This is our this is our producer side, we also have a consumer side, and our consumers consume apples and bananas, and our consumers have the have the usual kind of indifference curves for that, right, we're in a too good model here, we have our usual kinds of indifference curves, and so our consumers have some sort of indifference curve, I'm gonna make them. Now I'm gonna make them pretty normal looking. Our consumers have some kind of indifference curves. I That's some kind of a difference curves. Obviously more is better than more is better than less. But we have some indifference cos. And so we're looking for the item that we're looking, when we talk about efficiency here, we're looking for the thing that is technically feasible. And also maximises to maximises our our our welfare for our consumers, maximises welfare, because if, if not, then we could have changed our production and ended up with just more utility for our consumers, more utility in total. Uh, everything on the production possibility frontier is equally costly to produce. OK. So, some wrong answers, I mean the right answer hopefully is clear, right? Where would we be talking about as the efficient as the Pareto efficient allocation, given this graph, the thing that maximises utility subject to the subject to the production possibility frontier. Subject to technical feasibility. Any takers, yep. The one where the lines are tangent, yeah, exactly, right, the one where we have an indifferent curve that is tangent to the PPF, uh, and it's gonna be at that point, right, so this is gonna be our technical technically feasible point, right, A star. A, B, it's gonna be our sorry our our Pareto efficient point, and this is again not not that difficult, right, if you're anywhere else, any other production bundle that is on that PPF then um you can do better because we can move instead to a higher, We could move instead to a higher indifference curve, uh, which just makes us strictly better off, and so we should, right, um, but once you're in that point where things are tangent, then you can't move to a strictly higher to a higher indifference curve where you are strictly better off. Uh, the PPF being bowed out and the indifference curves being bowed in is gonna guarantee that there is that or there is exactly one point where those things are. Whereas at most one point where those things are tangent, there is kind of weird side cases where it is still the best to only make bananas, um, right, if you could, you could think about the indifference curves being incredibly flat, and the best thing to do would be to only make bananas. That is, that is in principle feasible. Or if you had PPF being not quite so vote out, you had a different codes being very, very flat, maybe, maybe only bananas is best. that that could happen, and they wouldn't necessarily be tangent. But if there's a tangency then that's gonna be, that's gonna be Pareto efficient. Any questions, issues, problems? Cool. And obviously any better indifference curve. It's also wrong Because it's not technically feasible. This is our parato efficient point. A star B star. Alright, what about equilibrium outcomes for this, oh sorry, yeah, uh yeah, that's our pre efficiency. Let's look instead at the equilibrium outcome. The equilibrium outcome again is quite different. Um, so there's gonna be some sort of price ratio in the market between our apples and bananas. Firms are gonna supply goods, they're gonna supply goods in a way um that they choose production to maximise the profit they can receive from producing those goods. Firms produce profits, firms produce that money, that generates income, the income flows to consumers because we assume that this is a closed market, right, firms are owned by consumers, firms make money by selling stuff, that profit they make then goes to the consumers, the consumers use that money to buy the stuff from firms. It's a, it's a closed system with firms and consumers, which you would have done I guess micro macro one probably a 22 sector model of the economy. Yes, no, some people saying yes and some people saying no, which is always slightly concerning. You do a two-se model of the economy, right, firms are owned by firms are owned by people, people are also consumers. Firms make profit, that profit flows to consumers as wages and dividends. Consumers then consume stuff and that flows to and that money flows and the money then flows to firms as um as. As revenue. Um, so consumers use this income to make, sorry, yeah, so the firm, the, the firms make income, the income flows to consumers through ownership and through wages. Consumers use income to buy goods. Um, according to their demand schedule, and the economy is going to be in equilibrium if the demand and supply for all of our goods are equal. And this is, this one is a bit trickier, so, so work with me, so you have to work with me here. We have our goods Apples and bananas. We have our production possibility frontier, which we talked about before. Ah, I'll make it a bit more. But if we can, yeah, it's better. that production possibility frontier. So let's first look at. Producers, let's first profit maximise for our producers. Let's put in a price ratio, and we'll put in a price ratio so that the price of bananas, And this in green. The price of bananas is twice the price of apples. Bananas are twice as valuable as apples. And so in terms of our production decision. Our production decision for our firms, they can make anything on the PPF, they're gonna make the point on the PPF where the trade-off that they have to make is that they would be producing two if they were to make a trade-off at the margin, they'd be producing 2 apples for every banana. Right, because then they then they're profit maximising, right, so here is not profit maximising, this is not gonna be our profit maximising point, because if they're producing here, they can trade off and make, you know, produce about 1 less apple. And make about one more banana and make more profit by doing so. And so what we want, if we've done this, if we've done this right around, let's see, if we want something somewhere up here. Where we would have to give, if we give up 2 apples. And we make one more banana. Or in the opposite direction, right, we. Go 1 to 2 in the other direction. And so if we're producing somewhere in this sort of region where the slope of this is 2, where the marginal rate of, it's not quite a marginal substitution, but we'll call the marginal rate of substitution is about 2, marginal substitution for firms for firm production is, It's quite flat, so it's a half. Right, it's relative to the price is is determined by the price ratio here, then our firm will be profit maximising. And so we're looking here for. Slow people to half. And this is an ISO. Profit line, anything on this line gives you the same amount of profit. And the slope of a half gives you that profit because then the firm, because um, It's driven by the. Price ratio between apples and bananas. So any of our ISO profit lines, our ISO profit lines, given this particular price ratio, our ISO profit lines all have slow of half. Obviously, you know, an ISO profit line down here is technically feasible but no good, an ISO profit line up here is not technically feasible, we can never reach it. And so we profit maximise by finding the ISO profit line that is tangent to the tangent to the PPF because that gives us profit maximisation. So we're gonna call this A supply. The supply. I say this is a little tricky, so if there are concerns. You should let me know. Any questions here, questions, problems, issues? Yes. So it was one half just because of, I, I, I've, I've put up this as the price ratio, um, and so because bananas are twice as expensive as apples. Anything on this, if we're if we're looking for an iso profit line, we're gonna want our iso profit line to be such that if we produce 2 less apples, And one more banana, then that's gonna give us the same profit, right, because we lose 2 apples, but we gain a banana. That, yeah, so it's just, it's driven by the price ratio, it's driven by the. Um, the price of, Yeah, it's the price of Apple price, price of. Apples over the price of bananas. I find it difficult to memorise which way around this is, I would be working it out, as I've just done here, to to to check. Problems otherwise, yes. Sure. I'm not too worried. It doesn't make any, it uh I mean, yes, you're right, the slope is minus 2, because it's a nice profit line, the slope is always gonna be negative. So for things where, and we do this in a couple of different places, if the slope is, if we have something where, because of all of the logic of how the process works, the slope, for example, is always gonna be negative. We often don't worry about putting the negative sign in front of it. Similar to like elasticity, right, when we talk about the elasticity of demand. It it's always technically, the, the price of the own price elasticity of demand is always a negative number, um, but we, because demand slopes down, but we don't always put the negative in there. We don't cause we, what we care about is the is the magnitude rather than the fact that it's negative. But yeah, no it is technically negative and either way it's OK. OK. Other questions. Alright, now is where we do the trick now is where we do some of the, the, I don't know, the surprising things I guess, which is we're focusing on, Firms produce profit, profit flows to consumers. Right, so our, because, because our firm's consumers are still kind of the same people, they're just wearing different hats, right, they they're sometimes they're acting as firms and then they and then they take the money they earn as firms and use that to act as consumers. The amount of money that the firms have, that the, the amount of money that the consumers have is the profit that the firms made. Right, the amount of money we have to consume is the profit that the firm has made, which means anything on that ISO profit line, that's now essentially our budget constraint for our consumers, that is our budget constraint for our consumers, right, because that's the amount of money we have, that's the amount of money we have, it's the price ratio that we have to face, and so our ISO profit line. Move this over here, our ISO profit line. He's also When we go into the consumer space. It's also our budget constraint. For the consumer side. Cause again, profit flows to firms, then firms, profit or rather revenue flows to firms and that then flows to consumers' income. Either either through wages or through capital ownership. And so from our consumers' perspective, our consumers are now maximising utility subject to a budget constraint, all the things that we normally do. We have a whole bunch of indifference curves, as usual. Uh, let's do one of them that's gonna be good for later. And so the problem that we have is that for our consumers, our consumers are wanting, So supply, our humans are demanding lots and lots of apples. And not very many bananas because bananas are quite expensive. Right, so in this, in this world, in a relative sense, bananas are quite expensive. Which is why our producers want to make heaps of them, like there's a massive supply of bananas, and not very many apples because bananas are really valuable to produce because the price of them's high. Whereas for consumers, because the price of bananas is so high, they don't want they don't want very many bananas, but the demand for bananas is so low and demand for apples is so high. So what we see with this is that this particular price ratio, this ends up, With the demand for apples being vastly more than the supply of apples, and the demand for bananas being way less. Than the supply of bananas. So this price ratio is not an equilibrium, does not generate an equilibrium, we do normally talk about the price ratio, we often do talk about the price ratio as the equilibrium, uh, but this 1 to 2 price ratio is not an equilibrium. We're making too many bananas, we're demanding too many apples, demand supply does not match in either market here. So this was not the equilibrium. Any Questions, questions, concerns, problems.

SPEAKER 2
Yep. My idea is if that was the price ratio, this would be um. Agree of outcome, but because this doesn't maximise utility. that would actually Yeah, I mean, uh, yeah, yes, that

SPEAKER 1
that's that, that's, that's them here, right? We, we, we test it, we test it. Is this price ratio an equilibrium? And the answer is no. Our answer is no, because when we do our work and our firms profit maximise and our consumers and and make some money and were to make some money and were to give that to our consumers and our consumers were then to buy stuff with that under utility maximisation, then the demand and supply in our markets is just not equal. Right, we're demanding too many bananas, we're demanding too many apples, we're consuming. We're producing too many bananas. We're out, we would be, this price ratio would lead to a non-equilibrium outcome, but, yeah, prices of things are different. If you had like some sort of weird international trade, maybe this would happen, right? So if this was in a world with, if it was an open economy kind of world, with international trade, where this was the price ratio, then this is what you would have, right, you would just be an exporter of bananas. This is and that would be fine, and an importer of apples, and that would be fine. But if we're in a closed economy world, this price ratio would not hold, right, uh, because we would be looking at our market and going, we're not, we're making so many bananas and bananas, there's this massive surplus of bananas, and we would expect there to be some sort of process that pulls down the price of bananas. At the same time there's not enough apples and so we expect there to be some sort of process that will push up the price of apples. Uh, because demand is, is wrong here, that's the wrong way, demand is the wrong way around. It's high for apples, slows. Any otherwise, yes, that was, that was good and helpful, I hope. Good question at least, if not the answer. Any other, any otherwise, any further questions, concerns, problems? Broadly OK. Alright, so let's then look for where the equilibrium is going to be. Clearly here the equilibrium had the price of bananas being too high, right, maybe we could have some other, some other point here, we wanna, we wanna, we wanna try and find, find the price ratio. So let's get rid of all the stuff in green, which is not an option that I have to do. So let's just rewrite all of this. To get rid of the stuff in green. Right, so our, our firms are limited by this PPF. Our consumers have a bunch of indifference curves. Different utility levels. And so we want to try and look for the price, we want to try and determine the price ratio that will ultimately lead to demand and supply being the same for both goods. Right, sorry, the demand for apples being the same as supply for apples, quantity demand for bananas being the same as quantity supplied for for bananas, right, so both markets clear, the apple market clears and the banana market clears. It's not a price ratio of 2 to 1 or 1 to 2, that didn't work out for us. Bananas were too expensive. How might we go about trying to find that price ratio that'll work? It is possible to to to logic logic our way to the answer here. From what we know so far. I Yeah, thoughts.

SPEAKER 2
Attention Yeah, it feels like the 8ro outcome is gonna

SPEAKER 1
be where these things are tangent, um, so where these lines are tangent. And it also, and, and we can, because they're tangent, they have the same slope, which is nice for us. And it's probably gonna be whatever that, that the price ratio that leads to an equilibrium outcome is probably gonna be whatever that slope is. Right, because if the if the price ratio is, In this case, sort of looking like it's close to 1 to 1. If we focus on this line that I've just drawn here in green. If the price ratio, and again it's in this, in this particular drawing, it's about 1 to 1, there's no special reason why that would have to be the case, it depends on the utility functions and the production possibility frontiers. Jimmy. If the price ratio is about 1 to 1, then this is an iso profit line, if this is one of our ISO profit lines. And then there's also obviously a bunch of other ISO profit lines the firms could make, or there's a bunch of other ISo profit lines all have the same slope. Then our firms profit maximise, where do our firms profit maximise, we don't, they don't profit maximise here. Because they can do better. Right, they don't profit maximise here because they can, they can instead produce on this higher ISO profit line. They don't produce here on this Iso profit line because everything on this Iso profit line is not technically feasible, it's outside the PPF so they can't get there. And so our firms profit maximise by producing, At I think firms are in black, aren't they? Our firms profit maximise by producing here, by producing this many apples. And this many bananas, and that maximises profit for our firms. Our firms are then maximised profit because our firms are max because our firms are making profit, the the money they make from doing so flows to our consumers because the amount of profit is given by that Io profit line, that is profit line is also in the consumer space, which is blue. In the consumer space this is also our um our budget constraint for our firms. Our firms look at that budget constraint and they say, well what's the best we can do, well, the best we can do if we're living somewhere on, somewhere on the budget constraint, which is the green line, uh, somewhere on the budget constraint here. What's the best we can do, well, we don't live on this indifference curve, because if we live up here, we can do better by living on this indifference curve, and we can't live on this indifference curve because that's too expensive, right, we can never afford this indifference curve, but we can afford this curve, this indifference, this level of indifference, and that's the best we can do, and so our consumers also consume here, and so this is also the demand for apples, and also, The demand for bananas. And so this price ratio, which again graphically looks like it's about 1 to 1, is also the equilibrium outcome, it's the raising the equilibrium outcome, it's the price ratio that leads to the supply for each of the goods being the same as the demand for each of the goods, for each of the goods, quantity supplied is equal to quantity demanded. And this is great, right? We're in equilibrium here, at this price ratio that's given by these, that's given by the slope of these iso profit lines and the uh allocation that results from that price ratio is the parato efficient allocation. Question? Well, look, you look like you had a question. Yes.

SPEAKER 2
It looks like you changed the.

SPEAKER 1
Right, so, so over here. I couldn't, I couldn't move any further over. Over here. This was profit, this was at the price ratio of 1 to 2, what what would happen, right, and we're out of equilibrium. Here, over here, I guess I can zoom in maybe and not have that happen. Over here, we've kind of got the price ratio being, it looks like it's about 1 to 1. Um, but it's where the slope of this isoprophy is, and the slope here I've because I'm looking for the equilibrium, I've determined the slope by the slope of the indifference curve and PPF at the point where they where they are tangent. And then everything works out really nicely. That then address your question? Excellent. Any other questions? Again, the 1 to 1 is something I shouldn't have done here because it could be an equilibrium elsewhere, that would be fine. You could easily imagine no we actually draw a quick graph after I'll just draw a quick graph now. The one to oneness is not, you know, the fact that the price ratio is 1 to 1 is not really relevant. You could easily have weird looking PPFs. And odd looking indifference curves. And so our equilibrium outcome is gonna be here. Point E and the price ratio is, you know, 13 to 1. Apples are 3 times as expensive as bananas, and that's fine, right, that is, that is. Within the realm of possibility. For our goods. We've just drawn Nicely, the first time. Any questions, questions, concerns, problemos here. Clear, everything's nice. Fantastic, alright, OK, so as we sort of expected, this was not, hopefully this wasn't too surprising because of the way we talk about economics in, you know, economics classes. The consumption, the production consumption point which was Pareto efficient is also the outcome, is also the allocation that is developed by the equilibrium prices. And this really is I mean this is called the first fundamental theorem of welfare economics. Right, the first fundamental theorem of voluntary economics says that if you take a um a general equilibrium model and you look for the equilibrium prices and you look for the allocation that is generated by the equilibrium prices, then that allocation is Pareto efficient. We can't make anyone better off without making anyone else worse off. And that's fine, right, there's a lot of simplifying assumptions here, obviously, right, we've assumed price takingness of of consumers and firms, which might be true in some cases to varying degrees, um, we've assumed that there's full information, we've assumed there's no externalities, we've assumed a bunch of other minor things about how the PPF is bowed out and how the how the utility curves are bowed in and that kind of stuff, but that's pretty reasonable. Um, but the statements are pretty general, right, we haven't made assumptions about PPFs, about how production works, other than that PPFs are bowed out a little bit, which is, which is pretty minimal and pretty reasonable. We haven't made assumptions about how consumers make choices other than that slight preference for diversity, that bode in, um, that, that bode into the origin in different curves, which again is, is pretty reasonable and pretty general, um. In particular, the, the, in our modelling here, we've assumed there are two goods, there's no special, there's nothing special about two goods here, this generalises immediately and in full to 10,000 goods, 100,000 goods, however many goods you think there are in the world, this generalises to that, this generalises to that many goods, um. So broadly speaking, what this is saying is as long as there's no problems. Then whatever we end up with in the market should also be the efficient outcome. This is a this is a and this is a bigger statement than our partial equilibrium because it's not just for one good, it's for the entire economy, right, people trading and buying stuff. When there's no problems, the market outcome should also be efficient. Any questions? Questions, problems? Obviously in the real world there are problems, we, we deal with them in different ways. Questions, concerns, OK. Because the next section really is quite a different little section, we'll take a quick break, we'll start again at 2 minutes to 11. So we'll take a 5 minute break, we're starting at 2 minutes to 11. If you have any issues, you can come see me now, otherwise I'll see you in about 5 minutes. Thanks.

SPEAKER 2
What you Um, just one of the questions about one of the assumptions we made, so we said that um. Individuals or consumers are price takers, what would it mean for individuals to be price makers instead of.

SPEAKER 1
So we don't, so in the generally good models we don't usually do this in a partially good model it's not uncommon to have something like that. Um, we don't normally talk about it that much in, in intro classes, but it's, it's monopsony is the, is the term for this. Um, so monopoly is where there's, well, monopoly is the extreme. Monopoly is where there's one firm selling many consumers, monopsony is where there's one consumer buying from many firms, right? So, um, and duopsiny is when there's two yeah. to Frances. To consumers buying for many firms, um, if you look at a lot, if you look at woollies and Coles, we often talk about them as duopolists, and that's kind of true, but they're also duopsonists in a different market.

SPEAKER 2
They purchase from all the farm prices, um, and so,

SPEAKER 1
and you can do all the same analysis, you do all the same sort of stuff, but you do it, but if, but if there's price taking consumers, then you have your, sorry price price of consumers, um, rather than having. Demand, marginal revenue, marginal cost, you have something like demand marginal cost and then like another marginal marginal thing that's twice as steep as marginal cost kind of thing um so you you build it, Flips around, um, and you get the consumers end up getting a lot a bunch of the, Um, additional surplus and it's inefficient for the same sort of reasons, so it's kind of like.

SPEAKER 2
consumers can drive prices as low as they want and surplus away from the ultimate outcome you get and I

SPEAKER 1
probably should do this on an earlier screen somewhere.

SPEAKER 2
Yeah, yeah, exactly right, so, um, so in the full

SPEAKER 1
monopoly case, right, you have marginal benefit, which we which we think of as demand, but it really is just marginal benefit, um, you have marginal cost, which we think of as supply but really just marginal, um. And so the, we normally have, you know, good equilibriums here, consumer surplus, but if we wanted to look at feasible options that were made that had more consumer surplus, consumers could, they could potentially under consume but pay a lot less. Mm, um, and that would, that would help be what the geops which used to. Cool, thanks. Alright, it's 2 minutes to, so we will jump back in. The model we've just looked at is feel feels a lot like a market model, it's kind of our, it feels like our normal market model where we have producers, we have consumers. It's a little bit weird in that we have those linked in the way we've linked them in that the producer's profit becomes consumer spending, right, becomes the revenue that consumers then have to spend on stuff, the income consumers have to spend on stuff, but it's still a kind of standard market model. What I'm gonna look at now is a little bit different, what we're gonna look at now is our general liquid model with no production, and this is our pure allocate, pure exchange what we what is sometimes called a pure exchange economy. So we're building a pure, Exchange economy. Which is to say we have people out there in our society, people are allocated goods, people have some sort of initial endowment of goods, or initial allocation of goods. And they can trade them between themselves, right? They can't trade from, there's no, there's no, there's no concept of money here unless you treat money as one of the goods that you can trade, which is fine, right, you can do that. Um, but basically we have each, we have um people who are out there in our society, who have an endowment of goods, and they're gonna trade those goods between themselves. In the big case you do often have money as one of those, as you have money as one of those goods that you exchange, but we're gonna we're gonna extract we're gonna abstract away from the money, um, because we're gonna just have two goods in our society because we want to make things as easy as we possibly can. We're gonna just have two consumers in our society because we want to make things as easy as we possibly can. Each consumer has an initial endowment and consumers trade the goods between them. So I have apples and bananas, you have apples and bananas, some amount between us, we have the sum of those amounts of apples and bananas, and we can potentially trade apples and bananas between us. And if it would make both of us better off, then we would make that trade. And making trades implies a making trades, the decision to make a trade has an implied price ratio, right, because if we trade 3 apples for one banana, we're saying apples, saying bananas are 3 times as valuable as apples, right, that's the trade we've made. We're gonna make a couple of standard looking assumptions about utility, right, diminishing marginal utility in each good, positive marginal utility in each good, more is always better, but the first banana is better than the second banana, it's better than the 3rd banana, um, and nice smooth preferences, so all our indifference curves are gonna be smooth, bowed in, nice looking objects. So, Let's try and model this with two people, and we're gonna try and be, I'm gonna try and be as careful as I can. We're gonna first look for efficient outcomes, right, things where we couldn't make both of us better off. Um, But I'm gonna be before I do that, I'm gonna make some minor arguments about what I think the efficient outcome's gonna look like, and then we can, then we'll then we'll try and find it on our try and find it on our graphs. And outcome's gonna be efficient if there's no way to make both people better off. In a certain sense, the thing we're looking for then is when our margin is we're looking for an allocation where the marginal rate of where all goods are consumed, cos if all goods aren't consumed, then we could have just consumed more goods. Um, and where the marginal rate of substitution is the same for both people. That's gonna be the, that's gonna be sort of our key thing. So one is all goods consumed. Because otherwise We can just consume more stuff. And the other that's a bit trickier to argue is that the marginal rate of substitution for person one, Should be equal to the marginal rate of substitution for person two, right, my margin of substitution between the two goods has to be the same as your margin substitution between two goods. Because I don't, I don't really want to use apples and bananas. Does that help you guys having apples and bananas as the words, or do you want other goods for more interest? Are the goods for more interest? Yeah. What's, what are, what are, what will our two goods be? What's the good? What's one of our two goods? Smartphones. I don't like, I'm sorry, I know I took anything, but I don't like smartphones because, because the diminishing marginality is too strong, right? Smartphones are a bit weird in that one is good and 2 is the same as 1 in terms of utility. So something something something that's where you, where you consume more than one of them. Cookies, excellent. Our two goods are gonna be cookies and. And do you wanna try again? Cakes, cookies and cakes. Unfortunately they're both Cs, but we'll go with what we've got. Um, so we quickly we've got cakes. And we have this broad idea of if, you know, maybe we both like cookies and we both like cakes, and we both like cakes more than cookies, causes a cake is big and a cookie small. And I reckon a cake is twice as good as a cookie. At the margin, right, at the at my current allocation of goods, culinary allocation of cookies and cakes, I reckon cakes are twice as good as cookies. And you reckon cakes are 4 times as good as cookies. Again, at your current allocation at the margin, you reckon cakes are 4 times as good as cookies. Well then clearly there's scope for us to trade. Because I can give you one of my cakes and you give me 3 cookies, and we're both better off, right, because our marginalous substitution were different, there was scope for trade because I gave up a cake and got 3 cookies and I'm happy, and you gave up 3 cookies and got a cake, and you're happy. Right, because our marginal substitutions were different. So if the marginal rates of substitution are different for the two different players in the game, the two different consumers, then trade is going to be possible, then improvements are going to be possible. And so in particular we're not gonna be at an efficient allocation, because an efficient allocation is one where there are no possible trades, no possible parade of improvements. Um, so the allocations for efficiency, we're gonna need all goods to be consumed, and we're gonna need the marginal rate of substitution for cookies and cakes to be the same for both people. Is that fine, seems reasonable, makes sense? Questions OK. And this is where it gets a little bit hairy, and I'm hoping I can make this all work really nicely. Yeah. And don't want to have that at the end there. OK. Uh yeah This is me, this is you. And we have cookies And cakes. And cookies And uh she won't have that kind of cakes. And we have some initial allocation. Right, I start off with. That'll be fine, um, actually, yeah, that'll be fine. I start off with 3 cookies. And 5 cakes. Uh, this is my initial allocation. The initial allocation for me. Just 3 cookies and 5 cakes. And you start off with, uh, I don't know if you want to call that 5, I want to call that. I've got 3 as well. That's fine. Sorry, I'm trying to make this so I don't end up with numbers I don't wanna end up with, and you have. 5 cookies. And 2 cakes. This is the initial allocation. Or you. I've made up, I've made up numbers here, obviously. And if I'm very lucky, this will be fine. Very, very lucky this will be OK. And I should have done this in different colours, but never mind, and I have some difference curves. One of which passes through my initial allocation. As you'd kind of expect And you also have different curves. One of which passes through your initial allocation, as you would expect. Any questions? Questions here, problems, concerns? Alright. So what we're looking for then. Is we're looking for an allocation that makes sure that all the goods are consumed, we're looking for a new allocation, which is an allocate an allocation says how much cookies and cakes I get and how many cookies and cakes you get. That makes sure that at that new allocation, Let's scroll down a little bit so we have some space, we need to make sure that all goods are consumed, so, We've been looking for a new allocation where my cakes, And your and your, sorry, this is where I actually can't do cookies and cakes because they're different, different letters, cookies and something else that's start with cookies and um, What's a fruit, what's a like a desserty something that starts with a letter other than C? Brownies, thank you, perfect, absolutely, exactly what we're after. Brownies, cookies and brownies. Looking for, we need to make sure that the total consumption of cakes, Is equal to the initial amount, sorry total consumption of cookies is equal to the initial amount of cookies that we have, so we have to make sure that we have 8 cookies in total because we started out with 8 cookies. And we need to make sure that the total amount of brownies consumed. Is equal to the starting amount of brownies, which was 7, so we need to make sure that we're looking for something where we have 8 cookies in total and 7 brownies in total, and the marginal rate of substitution between, And the marginal substitution for both of our consumers is the same, is, is at the same level. And so that's that, that is to say the slope of the different curves are the same. Any thoughts on how we might find. The level of cookies for us and you and brownies for me and you, that will make our marginal substitution the same and make sure we consume everything.

SPEAKER 3
I think it's from like This Yeah, so we could,

SPEAKER 1
we could potentially solve this algebra, right, if we had the algebraic numbers, we could solve, we could, we could work through this, right, we could, um, work out a formula for the m substitution, depending on the two goods, um, make sure that the m substitution is the same for both players and and solve these three equations, what looks like 3 equations in 4 unknowns, which is slightly concerning, um, but, and try and solve that out and and find a solution. That sounds difficult and not the way like we're gonna solve this problem, this particular problem, because we just have arbitrary difference curves, right, and we just don't know, yeah. Yes. Yes, that is exactly what we're gonna do. We're gonna do some neat graphical stuff. The, the, the, sorry, I should be clear, right? The point of this question was not for you guys to have the answer. The point of this question was for you guys to say that sounds like a really hard thing to do. Um, and then when we do it, it'll be like, oh, I see, it was a trick, and it's a trick. And the trick that we're, so what we're gonna be looking for is we're gonna make we need to make sure that our allocation consumes all the goods, moderate substitution's the same for both people. So what we're gonna do is we're gonna superimpose one of these graphs on the other graph, we're gonna do so in such a way that we guarantee that this automatically has to hold, and that's gonna, that's gonna save us a lot of time. And the way we're gonna do that is we're going to grab, This graph here. We're going to copy it, we're gonna grab it, and we're going to, Um, not do that. I'm gonna bring it over here so I can have it. And we're going to I just changed the size of it, which the whole point of this was not to change the size of it. Now grab this, we're gonna flip it over. We shouldn't change anything, right, it's still all the same information, we just, we've just flipped it over. And we're gonna pop it Here Oh And We're gonna tidy up a little bit. So this is for me in black. This is my number of Cookies. That goes from 0 to the maximum number, which was 8, the total amount of cookies that were being sold. This is my brownies. And it goes from 0 to 7, the total number of brownies that were sold. And the point marked as now as I is my initial with my initial allocation. Right, 3 brownies, 33 cookies, 5 brownies. Whereas, and then there's and then there's you. Just make some space. And then there's you. And you started off with, it's flipped around now, but you had 2 brownies, that's, that's that's here, that's 2. Sorry, you're, I should say, let's give us a little bit more room to manoeuvre. I don't know why that just happened. For you, you have brownies from 0 to 7. And this is the direction of More brownies, same as it was, and you started with 2. And you can have cookies. From 0 out to the maximum number of cookies, which is 8. That's how many cookies you have, should have been in blue. Your initial allocation was 2 brownies. And 5, which has been flipped over, but 5 cookies. And so I is also your initial allocation, which is annoyingly close to being the equilibrium, but it's fine, it's not quite sewer safe. So why have we done this? What do we gain from doing this? I want to say we gain a couple of things. First off, the initial allocations now now instead of having one initial allocation on a graph for you and one account initial allocation on a graph for me, we just have the initial allocation, and it's, it's one point on this box, right? Because, because we just interpret it differently, right, we interpret for me. We interpret in this direction, and I have 3 cookies and 5 bananas, and 5 brownies, and for you we interpret in this direction and you have 2 brownies, right, you have 2 brownies. And 5 cookies. So we're able to put the initial allocation. Nicely on this graph, and it's only one point that's the initial allocation for both people, for both me and you. The really, really big benefit of this is that any point on this box, now, if we take any point on any point in this box as our allocation, And we interpret it correctly, it's automatically gonna have both of these be satisfied. Right, because for any allocation in this box, right, if we take an arbitrary allocation, A, Then I have tonnes of cookies, right, I have 7 cookies. And you have 1, and so together we have 8. And I have, what is that, 2 brownies, and you have 5 brownies. So together we have 7. And so every point, every point on the every allocation within the what's called this Edgeworth box after the bloke who, who does it, Edgeworth, uh, Edge of everyone on this Edgeworth box automatically grants us for free. That every good is consumed that every good is consumed. And so we're only gonna have to worry about that other for equilibrium, we're only gonna have to worry about that other requirement that says that the margin rates of substitution has to be the same. Because every point in this box is good for us, works out for us. Uh sorry, everyone in this box has every good being consumed. Question? So I will redo this from the ground up in the way I will, I will at the end of today, uh shortly, I guess, I will redo this from the ground up in a way that you would do it in an exam, for example, um, because this is, this was doing it this way was really more to emphasise how it works and to generate understanding. If you just write it down, and as you'll see, if you just write it down. The way you do it in an exam, the understanding doesn't get, doesn't get created, that's why I've done it this way, I will do it that way as well after this. Alright. Otherwise, any questions, problems? Cool. So what we're looking for then. I, as I said, all goods consumed, that's for free, right, if we're in our Edgeworth box then all goods are consumed, so we're done. We're then looking for places in our Edgeworth box where the Majra substitution for me is the same as the Mare substitution for you, which is to say anywhere, points in our points in our Edgeworth box where the indifference curves are tangents to one another. And this is where your suggestion of doing it algebraically hits up against a bit of a, a little bit of a wall. It is, it is the right way to do it if you do it more generally, um, which is, and we, I sort of preface this by saying it was a bit tricky because you had 3 equations, right, total consumption of cookies, total assumption of brownies, moderate substitutions are the same, it's 3 equations, yeah, 4 unknowns, right, which is why, which is C M C Y C B and BM and BY. And that's shown here because there's gonna be lots of equilibrium outcomes. Right, there's gonna be lots of lots of outcomes, lots of places where the indifference goes a tangent, lots of outcomes that we call, sorry not equilibrium outcomes, lots of efficient outcomes, right, because we see one, we actually see one really really obviously. Here This outcome is. Pareto efficient. It's not feasible to get there from the initial allocation that we started with, but it is Pareto efficient. There's an outcome sort of here-ish. That's pato efficient, because the, because the indifference curves are tangent, because the margate substitution are the same for both for both players. There's an outcome here-ish. Where the marginal substitution saying, where the where the curves are tangent, right, I haven't drawn the curves, but you can think that there are, there's an infinite family of these curves, right, there is one in about there where the curves are tangent, it's about there. And so there's lots and lots of solutions, right, we draw this infinite family, we don't draw them in our minds, we draw the infinite family of indifference curves for me and we draw the infinite family of indiffer curves for you, and we look for all the points where they're tangent, and these are 3 of them marked in red here, not point A, but these are, these 3 here are 3 of them where they where these curves are tangent. With these families have got a tangent, but there's gonna be infinitely many, right, there's gonna be this big long line of big long line of Pareto efficient points, right, where these things are tangent. And so anything on our red line here, Is Pareto efficient. Because there's no way to make me better off without making you worse off, and no way to make you better off without making me worse off, and you can hopefully see that well I will actually go into a bit more detail with that, but that's gonna be our proto efficient, proto-efficient lines. This is often called, or this is, this is called the contract curve. Because if we make a contract, we're gonna end up somewhere on this curve, so it is the contract curve. Where we end up in that curve is not necessarily entirely clear, but we're gonna end up somewhere on that curve. The reason why these things are all Pareto efficient, why we can't make one person better off without making the other person worse off, if we zoom in and focus on this one in the middle, right smack in the middle here. We can say, well, where is it that I'm better off? Right, I'm the one, I started on the bottom left. So if we're thinking from this, from this point, no, from this point here. Where am I better off? I'm better off on any higher indifference curve, I'm better off on anything up here, anything above that indifference curve, right, is where I'm better off. Where you're better off because the zero for you is up in this top right corner, and so for you, towards the bottom left is having more of the goods, right? You're you're better off if you're, if you have more of the goods if you're above this indifference curve somewhere. So anything down here. It's where you're better off. Because that means you have more of the goods. And so clearly, if we're at that little red point right in the middle there, there's no way to make both of us better off, because to make me better off, we need to move to top right, to make you better off, we need to move to the bottom left, and there's no scope to do that. Whereas If we focus on the initial allocation, there's not a lot of scope because I didn't draw this very well, but there is some, there's a teeny tiny bit of scope for both of us to be better off, right, because we can both become better off if we move, start from our initial allocation and we move down to, well, I mean I'm not saying this is the best off cos it's not, oop, if we move down to here somewhere. This allocation instead, right we trade. I give up some brownies to get some more cookies, you give up some cookies to get some more brownies, um, and we are both on higher in curves, not much higher because I didn't draw this in a way that's really nice, but it's nevertheless higher a higher indifference curve. Both for both of us a higher indifference curve. There was some bit of scope there, and we could do better again, right, we could end up somewhere on the contract curve is when we can no longer do that. So the initial allocation was not Pareto efficient. There's the outcomes that are Pareto efficient that we would agree to trade towards, and then there's outcomes that we wouldn't agree to trade towards, that are still nevertheless Pareto efficient. Anything anything on the contract curve is Pareto efficient, like that. The recording hasn't stopped because that would be very annoying. No, it's all there. Any questions, questions, concerns here. Yes, he's my first and I'll come here, yep. Yes, we'll see, we'll do it, we'll do it more obviously in a second, yes, so no, you're, you're right, when we do it with the way you would do it in the exam, we'll see more obviously, yeah.

SPEAKER 3
Yeah. case where those in different curves provide the same amount.

SPEAKER 1
No, not at all, so. Um, so the question was, the points where the points on the contract curve, the points where the where the difference curves are tangent, do they provide, do the, does the utility for me equal the utility for you? And the answer is a hard no, and I think that's, We're gonna come, we're gonna come to it soon. So the answer is a hard no, absolutely not, and it, and it, it couldn't be the case, right, for a couple of reasons. First of all, we don't make intopersonal comparisons of utility, um, so me having 3 usuals and you having 4 fus doesn't mean you're better off, it just means that you like having your 4 usuals more than your 3s. Um, but also it couldn't possibly be the case because, Because Do red, is point X, allocation X, um is, Kind of, not that great for me but pretty amazing for you, whereas allocation Y is great for me and not that great for you, but they're both on the contract cur, they're both they're both individually parato efficient. Um, so yeah, the Preto efficiency criterion is a really minimal requirement, because it does not speak at all to equity or equality or anything like that. I the the most extreme parts of this are, are obviously the, The corners, right, the corners are Pareto efficient. Me having everything, which is what this top right corner is, is Pareto efficient. Right, because Any other allocation would make me worse off. Right, similarly, the bottom right, right, the bottom right is also pretty efficient because any other allocation will make you worse off, um, there's scope to make both people better off if one person already has everything. Yeah, sort of upgrade or set of allocations that are efficient is. The Edgeworth box. Otherwise, questions, concerns. OK. OK. So we then want to talk a bit about price ratios and here is what I'm gonna draw the Edgeworth box in a sort of an exam style of drawing it, um. Because it'll have a lot less, you know, it won't give you insight into what's going on, but it'll be quicker and easier to draw. We draw our box. We throw me down here. No, doesn't like that. We throw me down here and you up here. You're in blue. Like you in green actually, cos then we're very different. I have my indifference curves, I'm gonna have very flat indifference curves just for something different. I have my indifference curves. Which abode in towards my origin. I guess this is for me, this is my 0. This is Good A, this is more of good B. For me, And you have your indifference curves and your indifference curves abode in towards you, towards your towards the top right, and we'll try and make those reasonably, Here we go. Make those reasonably standard looking in different curves. I've probably drawn too many difference curves, but that's OK. We'll be fine with that. Was very few of them with the. I drew not enough being. Being tangent in nice ways, um. Here we go. And obviously for you This is more the direction which is more of good A. Sorry, more of good B, more of good B, this direction is more of good A, and this is your 0. And so our contract curve is any points. Where our indifference curves are tangent. And so our contract curve is this kind of weird meandering object here. And so our red line is our contract curve, the collection of Pareto efficient points. And we're given some initial allocation, and our initial why, our initial allocation is gonna be point I. Down here, I start with tonnes of good A and not very much good B, you start with quite a lot of good B and not very much good A. So there's probably scope for significant, Benefits to trade here. I actually want to go further down. I'm here now. Any questions, questions, concerns? Issues. Exams are nice cos you have pieces of paper and you can, it's quite hard to draw the yellow, the the the the top right persons in different curves because we're so used to doing it, doing boat in, so you can just, as I just did here, turn the page around. OK, alright, so I is obviously not proto efficient, there's a bunch of potential improvements, but we can talk about price ratios that might exist in this market, or price ratios in this market that could lead to some sort of parato improvements, not necessarily parato efficiency, but some sort of level of parato improvement. Um, and hopefully there's, so 1st, 1st of all, there's definitely scope for trade here. Right, there's lots of things where we could trade in a way that makes both of us better off. In particular, and I'm gonna get rid of this cause I don't want to take up the space with it, but in particular, anything, Anything sort of in this whole big region. Here Anything in our big region here? Any bundle in this region is gonna be a Pareto improvement. And because both people are better off. Anything outside of our big blue region here is not a parade to improvement because at least one person's worse off. Not clear which one, but one person to be worse off if we were if we went to a different allocation. Any issues, problems there? OK. Which means if we went in and had a price ratio, I'll actually leave it for now at least, if we went in and had a price ratio that said, oh we'll trade at, 2 for 1 I approach you and I say I will trade at 2, I will trade with you at 2 for 1. Somewhere in this blue line. Uh, which is 2 of good A for 1 of good B. You say, yeah, that sounds pretty good. I'll make a trade at that, I'll make a trade at that level, um, there's lots of scope for proto improvements, uh, at that 2 for 1, me, I would be looking to sell off A, I can't do that that's my help. I'd be looking to sell off A and buy B. To become better off And you would also be looking, and you would be looking to. Uh, to sell off B and buy A. And by doing so we can both become better off by making some appropriate trade. Questions, concerns, this level of price ratio is plausible, right, this was the story we told earlier. I had, uh, my margin of substitution between now it's um cookies and brownies is I like brownies twice as much as cookies at the margin. For you, you like brownies 4 times as much as cookies at the margin, and so we trade, and I and I give you a brownie and you give me 3 cookies, and we're both better off. Because at that price ratio, that 3 to 1 price ratio, I wanted to sell, Brownies, I words right, I wanna sell brownies and you wanna buy cookies. I so I, I wanna sell brownies and you wanna sell cookies and so we're able to to make an appropriate trade. That's not always going to be the case, right, if the price ratio is way out of whack too much, then there won't be scope for trade, even though there is scope for some sort of trade, if the price ratio is out by too much, then there isn't scope for trade. Right, if the price ratio were 5 to 1. I like brownies twice as much, you like brownies 4 times as much, and brownies cost 5 times as much, or we would only be trading, we'd be thinking about trading at a price ratio of 5 to 1. Well, at a 5 to 1, I go, amazing, I'm going to try and sell as many brownies as I can, right, because, because 5 cookies is great. And you also go, great, I'm gonna sell as many brownies as I can, and we're both out there trying to sell brownies and buy cookies, and that doesn't help anyone. Right, what we're talking about there is a price ratio that looks more like, That looks more like this. Ah, yeah, that'll be fine. I don't want tangency. Necessarily? Let's make it flat. Very, very flat, it's not quite flat, it's just very flat. But price rat like this, there's just no scope for anyone to be to to to buy. Good B, it's way too expensive, it's too expensive for everyone, even at the margin, to buy a good B at this price ratio, where B is very, very expensive. So you wouldn't have trade there. All of which is to say, or part of which is to say, there's lots of potential price ratios, right, in our little story of of I value bearings too much too much you value 4 times as much, anywhere between 2 and 4 is a viable price is a price ratio that would lead to trade, right, these prices all lead to trade, they different amounts of trade, potentially, but they will lead to some sort of level of trade. And so if the price ratio were 3 to 1, we would make some sort of trade and that would be fine. That would be, that would be good. We make trade. And both become better off, we do a prey to improvement. Um, because that margin substitution and difference allows it. One or two little other things to say, but not too much, any price ratio which allows trade, which increases utility for both consumers is possible. Is the thing we've said so far. Any questions, problems, issues? OK Price ratios do not. These price ratios though do not necessarily lead in itself to an equilibrium outcome. Right, because if we go in and we say, let's look at some price ratios and let's trade at, This price ratio here. We're only gonna trade until someone doesn't want to anymore. This is great, this is really, really good for me. We're only gonna trade until someone doesn't want to anymore, and you're gonna want to stop trading at like, About here At this price ratio, Because that's been the best you can do. At this price ratio, any any more trading, you wouldn't accept it. Um, so this price ratio here does lead toreto improvements, but it doesn't necessarily lead to the to the optimal outcome, right, or sorry, to a, to a Pareto efficient outcome, it just leads to an improvement, right, and then if we look at this new equal, this new, this new allocation, this allocation J. Being the number after I, We would have to, that that price ratio we had before that was, did allow improvements from I, it won't allow improvements further from J. We would have to renegotiate prices, right, and we renegotiate prices and we get a better price ratio. Potentially, but, but certainly Jay would be the best we can do. So what we're really looking for for our thing for for our for our price ratio that if you want to look for a price ratio, oh sorry, but there will be one of these price ratios that will lead to the to to to immediately, at least to an efficient allocation, right, so we're looking for the price ratio, which is about this one here, hopefully if I've drawn this well enough, which I haven't quite, but I'm gonna pretend I have. If we think about this as a price ratio between the two goods, and we trade at this price ratio, then we trade from I directly to, To allocation Z. Like HNZ is the is the thing we would trade to and it's on our contract curve, it's Pato efficient, and there's gonna be one of these price ratios that is both feasible, and on top of being feasible, also is the price ratio that immediately leads to Pareto efficiency. If you think about this as being trades that can be made, you know, piecemeal trades, where you can decide how much to, how much to trade, there are other ways you can look at this. So there's a range of prices that are feasible. One of those at least one of those will lead to. A Pareto efficient allocation, possibly more than one. But at least one. Any Questions. Questions, concerns It's our Edgeworth box, it's a really nice model in some ways, and it's really annoying in other ways because it's quite new and different than other stuff that we've worked with. Um, it gets used sometimes. I have seen this used in research work, this idea, as like the, the too good version, then you have all the big maths to explain the the multi good work version, um, it's slightly uncommon, but that's OK. Any questions, problems? And you can do comparistatics on this, right, you can say what happens if we change initial allocations, what happens if if um if preferences change and you can see things going on. Alright, so what we have, consumption points which are Pareto efficient can be attained by appropriate market prices, um, well, I should, I should have said it like that, I should have said it in a slightly different way, um. The final part of this, I guess, is that if we look at anywhere on the contract curve, and I haven't said this yet, but our second fundamental theorem of welfare economics says that if we look at any one of these points on the contract curve, any point that is efficient, before I say that, I'm gonna go back slowly, my apologies. Our first fundamental theorem of welfare economics. Says that need to be careful here. If we look at the point that is Pareto efficient, It's also an equilibrium. And if we so if we find the equilibrium point, it's gonna be pretty efficient. Now second fundamental theorem of welfare economics. Says that if we look at a particular efficient outcome, And we want to achieve that as the efficient outcome in this kind of model, as the as the outcome that we get, we can, if we allocate that outcome to people, and then we apply prices in the right manner, then we can get there, and we can get that then then that will be supported as an equilibrium. So it's every it's it's very nearly but not exactly, every outcome that is efficient is an equilibrium. And every outcome there is an equilibrium is also efficient. So these things really are, really are very nearly completely overlapping concepts in terms of the results we get. Definitionally very different, but in terms of the results they're they're they're quite different. Um, so yeah, as long as we have a particular, as long as there's no problems and we have a particular preto efficient allo preto efficient allocation in mind. We can get that from the market. If we can specify the given that we can specify the starting conditions of the market. Which is pretty nice, that, that seems like a good thing to have. The downsides in the next section where we talk about equity. Questions, any questions, problems, concerns, yes. No, absolutely not. So the question was if utility has to be Cobb Douglas, and the answer is a hard no. The utility has to have, so yeah, lots of simplifying assumptions, but it still feel pretty general, so obviously the many, it it goes to many goods. We don't need anything remotely as strong as Cobb Douglas, we need diminishing marginal utility. Positive marginal utility, smooth preferences, so, so your different curves should be, can't be kinked because that causes weird things to happen. Smooth preferences, preference for in preference for diversity, which is diminishing marginal utility, and more is better than less. That's that's all we need. We need much less than cobb Douglas. Just anything that's bowed in and smooth. Other which which is good, right, because, If we go through a real world and we try to try to vaguely apply this to real world things, people don't have Cobb Douglas utility functions, right? Cobb Douglas is a nice one that has lots of that works well for our mathematics and if and and matches the properties that we observe in the the the the broad qualitative properties that we observe in people of more is better than less and preference for diversity. But it's not like people have Cobb Douglas utilities really, it would be troubling if our results relied on people having Cobb Douglas utility because then we would say, well, people don't, right? In the same way, it would be troubling if our results here really heavily relied on there being two goods, because in the world there's lots of goods. Um, so no, we don't rely, it doesn't, doesn't rely on anything like that. It does rely on there being no no externalities, which is the problem. It does rely on there being no transaction costs, which is a big problem. Um, it does rely on the being full information, which is a very big problem, like there are issues, but it does doesn't rely on something as fundamental as conductless utility, a specific functional forms for the utility. OK. Just to finish up, we'll talk quickly about equity, um, and then we'll we'll finish about 5 minutes early, um, so all these results, they're they're they're really nice lovely results, but they're only talking about efficiency and as the question asked earlier, they're not talking about equity in any way, we're not discussing equity here. Um, defining equitable or fair outcomes is at best tricky, right, um, in economics we tend to have this next year, um. Can at best be described as tricky. There are people who go out there, you know, if you look at political economy, there's people who will go out there and say and talk about equality of opportunity, right, everyone starts from the same, same place, or you talk about equality of outcome. You can talk about, there's in, depending on, you know, which socialist thinkers you look at, you can talk about um, you know, from everyone according to his ability, to everyone according to his need and there's other people who are like to everyone according to his ability, from everyoneability to everyone according to his, um, to his input, to what he produces or something like those. There's different ways of thinking about and people have spent hundreds of years thinking about what it means for an outcome, for an allocation to be fair. Right, um, is it equitable as long as everyone starts with the same endowment, what does it mean for everyone to start with the same endowment, right, is access to the same schooling structure, giving everyone access to the same endowment, right, but then what if you're, Innately, naturally smarter than someone else, right, should you be given, should they be given additional supports so that their endowment at the end of schooling is the same as your endowment at the end of schooling in terms of, in terms of your level of education, if it's harder for them to get educated or easier for you or or or whatever. So it's really hard, it's, it's the point being, it's difficult to talk about what it means for people to have the same endowment. If I gain, if I'm just easier to please than you are, should we be given the same endowment, or should we be given the same endowment of happiness or the same endowment of goods, and those things are different, right, um. And so, but the, the point that we have here, the, the second last point here I guess is, um, these questions are things that economists don't often talk about, talk about sometimes maybe, and they can certainly provide data and and insight in these questions, but really questions about what is equitable and fair are mostly dealt with by political science, mostly dealt with by philosophy. Um, when you talk about the veil of ignorance, there's a lot of work in in economics that's done, um, to politically in political economy to build this idea of veil of ignorance and to formalise it and talk about it in a systematic way, but even that's still kind of poll size, still kind of political economy, which is a kind of different field than than most economics, um, so we don't talk about it too much, but regardless of any of the any of the known difficulties, We can certainly say that just because something is efficient and an equilibrium has no bearing on whether it is equitable or not. Efficiency really is a bare minimum in that if it's not efficient, that's very bad, right, because it's not efficient, we can just make everyone better off and so we probably should. But that doesn't mean we are at any any uh anything remotely approaching an equitable treatment, right? And we said that. The outcome way up here, where I have everything and you have nothing, is efficient in the technical sense, right, because there's no way to make both of us better off because there's no way to make me better off because I already have everything. Same thing for the bottom bottom left corner, you already have everything, so we can't make you better off. And then, you know, even even things up here, right, would you describe this, Up in this near the top right as equitable, probably not, I have a lot of stuff and you have a bit of stuff. There's no way to make both of us better off because, because, You don't have things that I want, right, we, we both at the margin value things in the same ratio, so we can't trade in a way that makes us both better off, but I have a lot more stuff than you do. And so whether it's equitable is, is very questionable. Yep. It's proto efficient, it's an equal, it is an equilibrium, it's an equilibrium supported by any prices, um, because if I have everything and you have nothing, and the price is 100 to 1, It doesn't really matter cos you're like to sell. Um, so it is still it is still in equilibrium, yes. Uh, as we would hope from our, from our fundamental theorems which say that any radio efficient allocation. I supported as an equal, can be supported as an equilibrium. Um, so what counts as equitable, Requires at least efficient. But we might demand more, but what extra we would demand is something that you would cover in your political science courses or philosophy courses if you're doing those things, not normally something that economics talks about in a significant way. One more slide, any questions? Here, though. On equity versus quality versus efficiency. These kinds of concepts. Alright. So just finishing up, um, why markets fail, this is kind of set up for last for how we this for the order of things last time of which this was not the case, um, imperfect competition, so non-price taking firms, we talked about at least a little bit, we've talked about it twice, in fact, we talked about it last Wednesday for monopolies. We also talked about it a little bit, sort of a bit indirectly, but a little bit way back in the game theory week in week 5. So we have talked a bit about imperfect competition already, and when we had imperfect competition, we saw these results broke down, this fundamental theorem of welfare economics, they broke down. The the equilibrium outcome was not efficient. Um, we can talk about imperfect information, and we have a little bit already, we won't, and we won't do any more work on that, right, so imperfect information where we had issues around, um, Uh, principal agent problems and that kind of thing, and we saw problems there. Imperfect information also came up to a lesser extent or to another extent for us when we talked about adverse selection in our, in our um in our insurance markets. Right, so adverse selection led to market breakdown, it led to not led to the efficient, sorry, the equilibrium outcome not being efficient. What we will talk about next week is externalities and public goods. So next week will be our week on externalities, and we'll talk about, talk about those and what we can potentially do about those in various circumstances. Something we won't really talk about is we won't talk about um an issue which we can talk about of consumers not maximising utility. Um, so this is in behavioural economics. The particular way where we find the most, I guess, reasonable, to my mind, um, concerns about consumers not maximising utility is when consumers are not utility maximizers, they are what we call satisfices. So rather than rather than consumers going out there and trying to do the best they can, given the constraints they face, they try and reach a satisfactory level of utility. Right, so you don't, don't go out and prop max don't go out and maximise, you say I wanna be. Happy enough in the decision that I'm making, and I'm going to satisfice in that regard, um, and so this would be, for example, the the distinction there is, uh, let's talk about, Studying hard and earning good grades is probably the good way here. Studying hard is difficult, it's time consuming, it's mentally draining, it's a hard thing to do. We don't want to do that. But we want good grades, and we want good understanding as well, but like, let's focus on the transactional aspect of this, and we want good grades. And so we, we could think of our person as utility maximising. How hard should I work in order to achieve grades, knowing that working harder gets higher grades, or believing that working harder gets higher grades, and work out the optimum level of of grade of working hard to grade that you get, right? And there's gonna be some optimum level for each person that may be different for different people. That's utility maximisation. Utility satisfying, so satisfying behaviour would be, I want a credit. I'm gonna work the amount of work that's required to get a credit. And that will make, and that will be that's the satisfying behaviour. I have a target target level of of of something, I'm gonna do the work that gets gets me there. And that might be the thing that maximises utility. But maybe you were wrong, and maybe credits are not actually the target level, maybe actually you could have worked only a little bit harder and got a distinction, or maybe to get a credit, you had to work incredibly hard and you would have actually been better off working a bit less hard and getting a pass, right? But for if you're doing satisfying behaviour, then you're saying, I want a credit. What do I have to do to get there? Um, and that kind of behaviour is pretty commonly seen in a lot of behaviour. I'm both in, in the, I, I gave that description because I suspect that's the mental process that a lot of you go through, um, not all, but many of you go through, um. Uh, I had one person ask me this very explicitly of, I want to get the top mark in the course, what do I have to do to get there? It is technically satisfying behaviour, uh, because they have a target, they want to get there, um. But you can think of this in lots of different circumstances, right, you don't decide how much, how, what is the optimum level of food to eat, right? You, you say, I wanna, I wanna eat 3 meals a day, and that's what I'm gonna do, and I'm gonna maximise a bit subject to that, I'm gonna satisfice, but, but basically, yeah, that's my target and I'm gonna do it, and maybe I'll be better off doing 4 or better off doing 2 or whatever, but you, you don't think about it. Um, and that also breaks things. And that that that kind of behaviour also breaks breaks all of these examples here. Alright, I didn't give you 5 minutes back, but I've given you 2 minutes of your life back. If you have any issues, you can come see me now. Uh, you should receive an email on Sunday with your peer reviewers, and you need to email them by Monday 5 p.m. please. That's all we have, if you have any issues, you can come to me now, else I'll see you on Wednesday next week for externalities. Thanks. That might be best. Thanks.
