SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
I Really so nice the point. Sure Alright, yeah, alright, it's about 50, so we will

SPEAKER 2
get started. Today we're gonna be doing our work on public goods. So we're gonna, this, this week is the external, I guess, no, this week is our externalities week. The main thing for this week is externalities. I'm very loud. The main thing for this week is externalities, but we do have the 1 hour on public goods and public good provision, and then the 2 hours um on Friday will be on externalities, positive externalities, negative externalities, how we deal with them, all the usual sort of stuff. Um, a lot of today will be stuff that you've seen in micro as as often a lot of stuff today will be stuff you've seen in micro one, but we will emphasise a few things and look at a few other little bits and pieces as well, but it, you know, this might be a, to some extent at least stuff you've seen before. In terms of admin, there isn't a whole lot by now, because it's Wednesday now you should have sent your draughts to your two peer reviewers, you should have received draughts back from your peer reviewers. If you've not, sorry, you should have, sorry, you should have received draughts from people for you to peer review. If you've not received draughts from people for you to peer review, first, please just shoot them a quick email, be like, I don't have this yet, what's happening? Right, because you need time to do this, right, you need, you know. They they need time to correlate the information you give them, but you need time to read over their reports and and send them stuff, um, which is why we allow a week there for you to do that. Um, so please just shoot them a quick email if you still haven't received it ah if don't get any reply from that email, then you come and see us, and we'll probably put up something on Wattle where you can be like, I haven't got draughts yet, what's happening, um, or I haven't got feedback from people yet what's happening. That'll be, that'll be a next week issue, um. That's most of what I have for admin. The exam is Thursday of week 13, which you already knew, 9 o'clock. That's all fine. Um, is that a good sound or a bad sound? Bad sound. Is it better or worse than 6 to 8:30? Much better. OK, well let's, let's call that a plus. Let's look on the, on the bright sides here, that it's at least not at 6 till 9:30. Yeah. Lecture next week on Wednesday will be new material, we'll be doing some fun stuff on experiments, on on economic experiments, uh, and then Friday will be a revision lecture, and we'll do the same thing we did for the mid-semester exam, I'll post some stuff online where you can put up, I'll post some stuff on the discussion forum where you can post questions and then we'll, Uh, cover a mix of those questions and questions from class.

SPEAKER 3
Yeah.

SPEAKER 1
Also Great question.

SPEAKER 2
The word limit for the report is just the report, it's, it's just the, the main body of the report that's part of your word limit, that's your typically 1500 word word limit. Um, titles are not technically included, but there shouldn't be that many of those. Reasonable footnotes are not part of this because they never are. Um, again, reasonable footnotes, if you put whole paragraphs in there, we will start to get antsy about it. Um, but anything that goes into any kind of appendix is not included. In your appendix, you should, you should have a bibliography, that's not part of your word count. You should have a feedback from, you should have the feedback you've been given, it's not part of your word count. You should have your response to that feedback and how you incorporated it, it's not part of your word count, none of those things are in the word count for the assignment.

SPEAKER 3
we've talked about a workout and the plus minus 10%.

SPEAKER 4
Reports it has a time limit for like podcast for example but it doesn't say anything plus minus 10.

SPEAKER 2
Just don't go, yeah, so yes, plus 1 10% for the for the for the for the videos cause you're not gonna make an exactly 5 minute long podcast, right, we'll have a bit of variance and that's that's fine. We're probably, honestly, we're probably more lenient with the time for podcasts and videos because, The issue for time limits is, the issue for word limits and time limits is really like, we don't want you to make a half hour long thing, and we also don't want you to make a 1 minute long thing because then you haven't covered enough stuff. So the word limit in time it's supposed to be indicative of how detailed it is. I'm happy for people to give peer review comments in whatever form is best for them. I expect having seen these last time, the huge majority of people give peer review as a page of comments, rather than as inline comments. Um, if you do receive inline comments, I'll probably include your original draught with the inline comments. As the as the peer review comments rather there's no need to summarise, summarise the findings, right, that's fine. Yeah. What if we what, sorry?

SPEAKER 0
Like Then they've done a pretty shitty job.

SPEAKER 2
I mean it's an integrity violation. Is one part of the answer to that, to that question. To stand up Oh, if you wanted to, you could push back and ask for personalised feedback, yes. No, yes, if you wanted to you could ask first point of feedback. Um, you don't have to, it would come up in your, presumably it would come up in your report and we would be looking at that feedback and going what the hell, or if you are really concerned and you're pretty convinced it's, it's a chat GPT feedback, then I'd be sending it to us to the course email being like, as as a serious matter, right, as, as a matter of, look, this, this looks to me like an academic integrity violation, can you please, For a push on for, it's not, it's not, it's not your responsibility to deal with, right, it's the issues are specifically my responsibility to deal with, not even, not even our, normally I do like an hour because it's all a teaching team, no, those things are my responsibility to deal with, um, so yeah, you would send it to me I guess in that context. Not a question I've had before. You know, feel free to, feel free to get feedback from Chat GPT on your on your responses, but like, It might be good feedback, and it might not, and how do you know? You have to know the material. To know if it's good feedback or bad feedback. Um, OK. Any other questions, questions, problems, yes. The the the draught is not graded, the reviews are not graded, the, the, the quality of your comments are not graded, but like you're helping out your classmates, you wanna do a good job. You'll probably also learn some stuff by reading other people's work and you can see how what they've done and whether you want to in like not incorporate their ideas, but like, see how they've talked about how how they've thought about things and it was like, oh, based on all this stuff on market structures, should I be doing a market structures part, which the answer is probably, Yes, um, not necessarily, but you know, in a lot of cases, um. So it's to help you and to help them, it's to help everyone. But it is a public good problem which may have problems. Any other questions for your assignments or otherwise? Alright, let's get started then. So, when we talk about, we're talking here about public

SPEAKER 3
goods.

SPEAKER 2
We're talking about when we're talking about public goods, we need to talk about this idea of rivalrousness and excludability, right, so when we look at a good, goods different goods and different services, but in this case particularly goods have different impacts, right, some goods are rival, right, lots of goods are rival, goods are arrival when when when one person consumes it, it either removes or diminishes the enjoyment of other people. You being in here is not rival. Guys can have a bit less chatting at the back though, it's a bit loud, uh, you being in here is means is not is apart from minor chatting, which does distract things sometimes, is not rival, right, because you being in here does not take away from someone else's benefit from being in here. So it's a non-rival good, whereas you eating an apple means that no one else can eat that apple, right, and so apples are a rival good. So it's, it's uh a good is rival the consumption of that good by one person means someone else can't. All of the goods that you think of as goods, all the goods that we've ever used in any examples throughout this entire course, throughout every part of micro one apart from the week you spent talking about about public goods and common resources are rival goods, because in the market, most goods that work well in a marketplace kind of setting are rival goods. It doesn't really work. The market structure doesn't work very well as a way of um allocating non-rival goods. Um, but lots of goods are non-rival, as I say, sitting in the room here is non-rival, clean air is non-rival, lots of stuff is non-rival. Um, as a side point to that, as a different axis of properties that goods can have, we have excludability. And excludability is the extent to which we can stop other people from using that good. And again, for our ideas of market structures to work, for our ideas of trade to work, we need to have an idea of personal ownership, and for an idea of personal ownership to exist, we need a good to be excludable. Right, we need to be able to say this is mine and you can't have it, right, this is what excludability is. And again, the goods we talk about are excludable because they're the ones that are amenable to the kind of analysis that we do, but lots of goods and uh for that kind of standard analysis that we do, but lots of goods aren't excludable, right? We don't exclude you from, we don't we we don't and can't exclude people from again, clean air, um, we don't and can't exclude people from something like military protection, like the umbrella of the security umbrella, um, we, Can, but don't exclude people from things like public hospitals. But you could, right, so there is a distinction there is a bit of a distinction there, um, we don't normally emphasise distinction too much, but I do want to make it clear that that you can have goods that are in practise, not excluded, but could have been if we'd decided otherwise, right, which is, which are, which we would still call we we would still call non-excludable, but you could tweak how the good is. Is provisioned in a way that made it excludable, whereas something like, again, the security um the military security umbrella or clean air, that kind of stuff, um, access to public parks, right, access to national parks is not excludable, but you could make it excludable, right, you can put up barriers at the entry and say no you can't come in unless you do X, Y and Z, usually pay money. I should say, as an example, access to Namaju National Park is not excludable. You can just drive in, it's fine. Access to Kosovsko National Park is partially excludable. If you want to drive in, you need to have paid the money to go in. Um, so it's Maggie, we could exclude from the Magi, we just don't. These things exist on a spectrum, as I've just sort of pointed out with excludability, right, some goods are super excludable, some goods are completely not excludable, some goods are you know, a little bit, right? I can make it hard for you to enter, but I can't stop you. Um, similarly, and possibly even more so for for rivalrousness, right, we think of lots of goods where me using it has a little bit of a negative impact on other people's enjoyment, but not much versus rivalrous of like I eat the apple and then I've eaten the apple and you can't have it. Um, so we can get a bit of a spectrum happening here for both of these types of things. Any questions on rivalrousness and excludability?

SPEAKER 3
Specific No, these can be physical, these can be monetary,

SPEAKER 2
these can be, these can be whatever, right, excludability is the there is that it's possible that that there is an owner of the good and the owner of the good can stop other people from accessing it. Um, that might be physically stop them, it might be monetarily stopping them, right, it might be whatever it is that's stopping you from doing it. Um, you can certainly think of, you know, online spaces which might be excludable, um, because there's an owner of the space and they stop people who they don't allow in, and that's not geographic, but it's kind of, Pseudo geographic, I guess, um, uh, so yeah, uh, and similarly for rivalrousness, right, uh, I guess rivalness is always not monetary. But you could have excludability of like, To join this club, your parent must be in the club. Well legislation, right, to join this club, you must, whatever, even if it's not monetary. Um, Uh, this is very specific, like women's spaces, right, are, are excludable in that like I can't go into them. But it's not geographic, it's just. Features of people. Questions Thank From this, we can talk about different types of goods. As I've said, all the goods we've kind of covered this semester so far, and we'll cover next, you know, for the rest of the semester apart from today are private goods, goods that are rivalrous and excludable. And cos you really do need both of those things for all of the logic about provision of goods that we've used to make any kind of sense, right, because you need excludability because as I say, you need to have, you need to have the idea of some, the producer produces the good and then they own it and can stop you using it unless you do something, which is, which in our model is usually pay them, which always pay them, they can stop you using it. That means it has to be excludable. If it's not excludable, then the producer makes the good and then you just get to use it because they can't stop you. For a good to be, makes sense in our models of how we think of goods, it has to be rival, because we need to have a situation where if I buy the good, then I consume the good and you don't get to consume the good, right, because if me buying the good means that means that um, if a good is non-rival, and I, I buy the good or create the good, Then why would I stop you from using it, why would I not sell you a timeshare or something, right? I'm say I've made this thing, you can use it, if you pay me a little bit of money because it's excludable but non-rival and then you can use it and you can use it and you can use it and you can use it. Right, and we sell it off to everyone because it's non-excludable, so this is, you could maybe get away with this like a zero marginal cost kind of idea, but it is a bit weird if you, if you try and talk about those things. So private goods are excludable rival, the extreme opposite of that are our non-excludable, non-rival goods, and we call these things public goods. So these are the goods that are out there and we tech as a technical term, we call these things public goods. These are our tech these are our objects that are out there where, No one can be stopped from using it. Because, well, no one is stopped from using it at least, and one person's use of it does not impact the enjoyment of other people. So Naadji National Park is a public good. It's a public good because it's non-rival. If I'm there, it's a big space, if I'm there and you're there, I don't know that you're there, it doesn't matter, right, you do not diminish my enjoyment of the good. It's not excludable because you can just go in if you want. Again, that security umbrella is is a public good, clean air is a public good, public hospitals are not a public good. Right, cost is not public good because they're not excludable, but they are rival. There's a fixed amount of doctors and nurses that are available. If you're using them, then I can't. They are rival, so they're not a public good. The fact that they have the word public in the name does not matter. The fact that they are provided by the government does not matter. Right, what determines from an economic standpoint that something's a public good is that it's non-rival and non-excludable. It might be government provided security umbrella, it might not like cleaning. Questions, questions, problems. Now we have of course, if I, I said that these were sort of orthogonal properties that you could have rivals and cludability orthogonal properties, which means that we also need to think about goods that are rival and non-excludable or excludable and non-rival, and we, we have terms for these things, right, rival but non-excludable are our common resources which have their own set of problems, which we'll mostly talk about in a negative externality sense. Um, and goods that are excludable but non-rival, these are our club goods. This is a, um, more people using Netflix doesn't impact on Netflix in any significant sense, um, so it's non-rival, right, me using Netflix doesn't make it harder for you to use Netflix doesn't make Netflix worse for you, just because I'm using it. But it is excludable because Netflix can stop you from accessing it. And so we call these things club goods. Are you a member of the club? But it's club goods instead of, are you a member of the club, right, I'm a member of the Netflix club because my parents like it and I buy it for them and then just use theirs. Um, I'm not a member of the what are other streaming services? I'm not a member of the Disney Plus Club, right, because it's desperately expensive and, I have torrents for things that I. From Disney Plus. Club books, any questions, problems? Issues. Lovely. Um, As it says, right, these are on a spectrum, so most goods are on some kind of spectrum between these, right, again, apples are really, really private goods. Security umbrella, really, really public goods. National parks slightly less public, right, they're a bit more excludable, they're a bit more rival, right, the local park, a bit more rival again, a bit less excludable maybe though, so like it's a bit unclear what you where where exactly these things lie, but, but you make a choice. And so you have lots of different goods, right, food, congested toll roads, these are your these are your private goods, um, fishing is your pretty stock standard common resource example. The old one obviously is the Commons, which is where the name comes from, um, but that's like mid 1700s Britain, um, so it's going back a bit, that's where the name comes from, from Adam Smith. What about Club goods, Netflix, Wi Fi. Uh, up to a point, uncongested Wi Fi and public goods, national defence, climate change. OK. Questions, questions, concerns here. I haven't got this too much here, but roads are a really nice one here because roads fit into all four of these categories, depending on exactly what's happening with the road, right, a congested toll road is a private good, right, it's rivalrous, small cars make it worse, it's excludable, you have to pay to use it. Um, a congested public road is non-excludable but but highly rival, right, because more cars make it worse. Um, a uncongested toll road is a club good. Right, club goods exist in the realm of what we call artificial scarcity. Right, an uncongested toll road doesn't need to be a toll road, it's only a toll road because it's excludable. the, the, the price creates artificial scar there is artificial scarcity of this good. It could be free for everyone, but we charge for it anyway. Same thing with Netflix, Wi Fi, that kind of stuff. Um, public goods are your uncongested public roads, uncongested free to use roads, roads exist everywhere here, which is, which is a nice little thing about them. Any questions, problems. Yeah As I've said, everything so far has been private goods, for the rest of today we're gonna talk about public goods, specifically for public about public goods. So again, non-rival, non-excludable. And I've said this already, right, what we call public goods is different from colloquial usage, public schools and hospitals. I've said here private goods because they're rival and excludable, um, the excludabilityness of public hospitals is maybe a little bit iffy, excludability of private public schools is a bit stronger, but, but it's not a little bit iffy. You could call these public hospitals and public schools, um, Uh, common resources maybe, depending on how you think about excludability in that setting. Yeah this is really is a a a a spot of questions before we do the new stuff and the maths and not the maths but like you know the bit of stuff that we're doing, questions, problems, yes. Money's a kind of a weird one, money's almost definitely a, I don't have a good answer for you. Money's kind of a weird one, money's not a standard kind of good, um, for a couple of different reasons, doesn't have intrinsic utility, which we kind of need to be able to, to, to be able to talk about this problem. um money exists because it gives you access to other stuff, um. It's, it's tricky. I'd have to think about it. I don't have a quick answer for you. OK. Public goods, because public goods are non-rival and not excludable, the way we think about utility and demand, the way we have in the past thought about utility and demand doesn't work anymore, right? For private goods, our idea of sort of how private goods worked was that each consumer had their utility from the good, the utility from consuming the consuming some number of the goods, um, turned into a when we wanted to maximise utility subject to whatever, um, we looked at the marginal. And said that they're gonna consume where the marginal utility for them equals the equals the price of the good, they have to they have to pay for the good, and then if I buy a unit and you buy 2 units and he buys 3 units, then together we bought 6 units. Right, that was this idea here, that was our that was our idea here, right, so for private goods, What we're thinking about is, is we have our, our quantity, we have our dollars per unit. Ah, no, not that. We have what I wanna buy. This is me, this is my marginal, I should say this is my marginal utility, marginal utility for me. This is the Marginal utility for you. At a particular price point. P.0, I buy this many, sorry, that's Q, I buy this many. You buy this many because our marginal utility curves are also our individual demand curves, I should say lowercase d, our individual demand curves, and so together, We bought the sum of the quantities, because I bought 1 and you bought 2, so together we bought 3. For private goods that makes perfect sense, and so we sort we look at the demand curve for each individual, and we add that the the black and the blue line, the individual demand curves, we add them together to get the red demand curve, which is the market demand curve. By adding up quantities. Any questions, problems, hope that's fine. Lovely So the quantity we demand is the sum of the, the quantity at the market is the sum of the demand by each individual person. For public goods, that whole system doesn't make sense, because if I want if at a given price I want to have 1 square metre of park and you want to have 2 square metres of park, well then you buying 2 square metres just means that I get those 2 square metres, and so why would I buy an additional square metre? I, I, I don't have anything, I get 2 square metres anyway. Um, so the logic just the, the, the logic that we did here doesn't make any sort of sense. The logic that we would have to use instead is we're gonna look at the utility, right, we look at the amount of square metres of park, square metres of local park, and the utility for society of the amount of square metres of local park is the sum of the utilities from me and from you and from him and from her. Right, we add up all the utilities. It also means that the marginal utility at a particular quantity level is the sum of all of these things. And so if we're graphing, and so if we're thinking about graphing this, which we will do more on the next slide as well, thinking about graphing this thing again we have quantity and we have dollars per unit. We want to be a little, yeah, we have quantity, we have dollars per unit, quantity here is, is square metres of park that get built. Is I have my utility from square metres. Down here, oh, not slipping upwards. I have my utility. My marginal utility down here, and you have your marginal utility over here. That's, I'm just gonna do it the easy way, I'm not gonna make things more difficult than they have to be. And you have your marginal utility here, and he has his marginal utility here, she has her marginal utility here, and so together we say at a particular quantity level, Q This is our marginal utility for person 2. A This is our marginal utility for person one. At Q, this is our marginal utility that person 0 generates, I, I think it's actually 0 and 1 the other way round. And so the total amount of marginal utility at at Q is the sum of all of those, which is probably about, Here somewhere. Right, it's the total, it's the sum of the marginal utilities. So we're not, we're not adding quantities, we're adding marginal utilities. To get a Market level demand. For the size of the park. Which hopefully feels pretty reasonable. Because what we're saying here, or part of what we're saying here is the price of a unit of a square metre of park might be like, $1000. For a square metre of park. And so when I go and I think about how many square metres of park I would buy if it was $1000 my answer is none, right? I would rather have the $1000 than have even the first square metre of park. And you say none because you'd rather $1000 and she says none because you'd rather have $1000. But collectively, the collective benefit from that square metre that first square metre a park is more than $1000 right, it's way up, way up high. It's more than $1000 for the collective benefit, right, between all of the 100 people, the collective and all of the society which you know is that, you know, the, the 400,000 people, the collective benefit is worth more than $1000 per per square metre. So there's gonna be some some amount here. So we add up the marginal utilities, we this vertical summation idea. That we have here. No one person would spend any amount of money on this good, um. But the benefit to the societal benefit might be high, would be high. Questions, questions, problems. Issues. Yes. How many How many public parks, sorry, sorry, so possibly yes, so you could have an instance where the, the super rich buy the, you know, build a public, build build a park nearby that is available to everyone. I don't know all the examples of that happening. I, I think historically that was more common in a in a this sounds, I, I hate saying words like this, but in like a pre-capitalist society that makes a bit that that happens I think a bit more often when you have um when individual utilities look a bit different for the very, very wealthy. In modern society, I can't think of examples where someone's just like, I'm gonna, I'm a super rich person, I mean they might be, I'm a super person, I'm gonna build a park, anyone can use it. It doesn't seem like something people, people do. Um, if you can think of examples, yeah, right, so, so in principle, yes, it could happen, it just doesn't, I guess in principle, in practise, yeah. Sure, yes, so here we are doing the very, very mean nasty thing of adding up utilities, where we're comparing cardinal utilities, um, I'm gonna get away with it and I I'm I'm gonna make two arguments for why we're sort of OK here. Um, one is that these are money, what we call money metric utilities, right, so we are talking here about utilities measured in dollars. So it's not necessarily utility, we're adding up willingness to pay, rather than adding up utilities, which is fine, right, if I'm willing to pay $10 and you're willing to pay $20 and it's it's other good, then collectively we'd be willing to pay $30. Um, so in that sense it is, it is OK. Um, the, I think that's probably the better answer. The slightly worse answer is you're right and we're gonna push that issue under the rug, um, but yes, I think calling these willingness to pay rather than utility is, is the, the right way of thinking of this year. Does that answer your concern? Lovely. Questions otherwise. Lovely. Cool Alright, so I guess I've said this right, why is there market failure, right, the issue is that public goods experience phenomenal underprovision unless there's some kind of government intervention. They're goods with we can think of these as good with massive positive externalities, if you want to think of it in the externality senses we'll talk about it next time. And and again, right, a new park in Canberra would be great. Are you going to buy it? No, am I gonna buy it? No, because I don't have the money, like you know, I don't have the money to do this, and if I did have the money. I'd probably be the kind of person that wouldn't do it. I wanna be, if I wanna be mean about the very rich, if I was if I had the money to do this, I probably wouldn't be the person, the kind of person that would do it, and in any case, in practise I don't know of this happening. It may happen, I don't know if this happening. Um, and so the key issue is the key term, right, if you're looking for, if you're a kind of a key term kind of person, then the key term is free, the free rider problem, is that there's no excludability or not enough excludability, we can't make people pay for it. And if the owner can't make people pay, then why would you make the good at all? Right, so you can think of this in like a um in an invention setting, right? If you're an inventor, why invent stuff if you can't, if there's no excludability, if there's no patent system, why bother inventing things because other people will just then take them and use them and you will get nothing for it, and you will have spent all this time and energy doing something that people don't, that you that you get no immediate benefit from. You might get intrinsic benefits and all that kind of thing, I know people do do this kind of stuff all the time, um, but this is our, our system here, yep.

SPEAKER 4
Necess you just You let someone collect. Surely they're gonna want Right Yeah, so if you, if

SPEAKER 2
you, if it was if it was a good that was in principle excludable, you could have the kind of thing you're talking about where um, where I guess a government intervention that stops you from making it excludable would ultimately mean that the good isn't provided at all because of the free rider problem. But we can think of the goods that are in principle non-excludable, right, so again, you might, you might build a public park and charge entry. But then it's not a public park, right, so it's a private garden, um, but the, so the public park has under provision. OK. Alright. So we underprovide because. There's no incentive to provide this good, there's no money to be made, there's no incentive to provide this good, um, and so, and there's costs to providing the good, so it just doesn't get done, it doesn't get done enough. When we're talking about public goods and we have emphasis we have sort of mentioned this already, we're talking about public goods, um, marginal utility is fine, um, sorry, we're talking public goods, some public goods are goods that we can think of as scalable, right, we can talk about the military and making it twice as big, and in that context, um, quantity makes perfect sense, right? Um, clean air is something that's scalable. We could have clean air or cleaner air, or the cleanest air, right, you can scale how clean the air is. Um, and so marginal utility for, you know, parts per million of pollutants makes sense. Um, some things are less scalable, right, when we talk about public parks, we don't normally talk about the number of public parks, right? Do we want to have 1 or 2 or 3 or 4, or, you know, 100 or 200, but you so it really is like, do you want to have a public park here, um. But then, and that's not, that's a 01 question, but then you talk and so if we wanted to talk about marginal utility, we talk about something like the size of the thing, or if we really can't do that, we might talk about the quality of the object as the scalable thing. And so we talk about, you know, the marginal utility of making a million dollars park versus the $1.5 million park versus the $2 million park. Um, but in either case, regardless of what we do here, we're gonna put um quantity of public good, um. It's just that sometimes quantity really means quality, so even if there's still one of them, it's, you know, we're building a road from A to B, right, but how nice do you want the road to be? Is the quality of the thing. As different utilities depending. Questions, yes. There Yeah. How additionally protected you either are or feel depending on how you do this. Is the benefit of the One more soldier. How, how much healthier you are when there's 1 less part per million of pollutants in you. Alright, we wanna know how much of the good to actually produce, rather we want to know the social optimum level. Um, and so for that we have the Lindahl equilibrium of our public good provision problem. So we have Q, again, queue is gonna be here either quantity or quality, depending on what you want to think about. Dollars per unit might be $1 per unit of quality, so we have to, you know, we have to work with this a little bit, um, but it does all kind of work together, so it is sort of OK. Excuse me, I'm not gonna do two agents. Just gonna, just gonna do the generic version, um. And what do we have? Well, we have what we have, we have, we have one part of our market is what we have, well, not our market, one part of our problems that we had before is our consumers, and our consumers, each individual consumer, there's you know, 100 consumers, each individual consumer has phenomenally low value for your public good, because relative to the relative to its cost, right, because the cost of an extra, So No, it's not all way around. Marginal cost, the cost of the extra soldier might be $100,000 per year, and I'm willing to pay 50 dollars. And you're willing to pay 20, and she's willing to pay minus 6, I, I'm, but like um. The benefits are phenomenally tiny relative to the costs, but there's 20 million people that are providing for this, and so that, and so those those values add up very, very quickly. So every, you know, this, these numbers here are 100,000. And each individual person has their demand way down here, their individual demand way down here. But when we add up all of those individual demands. We get a market demand that's much more reasonable. Right, market demand, that's a much more reasonable quantity, that's summing up all of those individual little tiny bits. And I do actually need to have those individual tiny bits down here. Modully for an individual. And so what the Lindahl equilibrium says is what the word equilibrium is our is our optimal provision of public goods, um, says that what we would really like to do, we do have time, what we'd really like to do shockingly is we want demand equal supply, right, we want, well, we don't want to equal supply because there's no demand curve, there's no supply curve, cos there's no firms here, there's just the government providing something. Um, But we want the optimum is going to be at our usual optimum where marginal cost equals marginal utility because if we produce more than that, if we hire more soldiers than that, then the cost to society, which is our marginal cost, exceeds the benefit to society and that's no good. If we want to go, if we consume less than that, then we're in a bad situation, right, if we're down if we're down here somewhere for for consumption level or um production level, um, this is no good because we can do better, because the the benefits of society exceeds the cost to society at the margin. So clearly the optimum level is, To produce this amount of the quantity of the good, the public good, this quality, this number of soldiers, whatever it is for the public good. And each individual person. We actually have two different individual people with different, different utility curves. Each individual person pays according to their own marginal utility curve, right, so the per the blue person pays. This much The green person pays. This much, every person pays that amount of that that amount for the good. And then the total amount paid because there's all these people paying and because the the the market demand, the social demand is the sum of all the individual utilities, the total amount of money being inputted into our society is gonna be up here somewhere. Is the total amount of dollars per unit that we're able to, that we extract from people. Um, and then that's fine and great, and we extract enough money, and we pay for the good and everyone's happy. Is the marginal price that we charge people. It's our marginal, yeah, the marginal cost price we charge people for the good. But each individual person is paying teeny tiny amounts. We'll come to that question in a second. It's a good question, we'll come to it. Um, this is lovely because we get all the things we want.

SPEAKER 3
Right, equilibrium level production, equilibrium cost share, there's no incentive

SPEAKER 2
to deviate, right, because, so it is an equilibrium, right, each person being charged the price that they're being charged does want to buy the amount that they that they that that is actually being being produced and purchased and being produced and made in society, and so everyone goes, sure. This is fine. And we have a problem, and the problem is, People lie. Right, and the problem is that people have incentives to if if assuming that the government knows people's stuff here, knows people's utilities, then they do this, right? But it's not the case, first of all, it's not the case the government knows this, knows your utility necessarily, and we see that, right, because we don't see a situation where I am charged $50 for each soldier that the government employs and you're charged $20. Right, we're all charged, we're all charged varying amounts, we're all charged amounts according to our income rather than according to anything else. In terms of income we pay income tax and that gets funnelled, one component of that's funnelled to army. So, we've got enough time I think, just barely. We're gonna do a public provision game. In the next few minutes, so we're gonna be quick, we're gonna be super quick. You're gonna get a piece of paper, I should have just handed these out earlier. You're gonna grab a piece of paper, you're gonna take one, you're gonna pass the rest back, and you're gonna end up with one, end up with exactly one piece of paper. You're gonna people are gonna have to get up and get up and give me a hand here cos I don't have time to get this to everyone. On this piece of paper is your personal true value of the good. If there's excess, don't worry. Grab one, grab some, grab some. Some from the bag, pass them around. Thanks. Whatever you say, and, and you were, you're gonna pick a value, that's your true value public good. You're gonna enter our value, our value into what. There's a spot on water where you can enter a value, it's in this the main line area there, here it is. A value in it, we're gonna call that your revealed value. We're then gonna determine whether the good is produced or not, the, the system is set up so that if everyone revealed truthfully, the good would be produced. If everyone reveals truthfully, the good will be made. If everyone lies by a lot, the good won't be made, right? If the, if some of the revealed revealed numbers is um is sufficiently large, then the goods provided. If the goods provided, you pay, you pay part of your revealed you pay part of your costs, you pay part of your revealed costs. You pay the proportion of the proportion of costs, right, so if I say $10 and you say $20 then you pay twice as much as I do. And we take enough money out of you to make this happen, right, so the example we give here is if the good costs $100 to make and I put $75 and you put $50 then the good is made because we bid $125 which is more than the cost of production, and I've bid 50% more than you, so I pay 50% more than you. And that's the, that's the system here. So people have incentives to try and make the good be made, but also to sha, but potentially to shave your bids at least, and your surplus is your true value minus the cost you pay. You feel free to have a chat with people around you, don't have a chat with people too far away from you, but people around you because some information gathering is fine, but not heaps. Does anyone still need little pieces of paper? So everyone, back corner, have little pieces of paper, head online, make a decision on how much you want to put in. It's in wattle.

SPEAKER 1
to get the good.

SPEAKER 2
The incentive structure is what you would love is to write down 0 and everyone else put in enough money to make the good happen, but maybe it does happen. You should be able to see it, let me log into Waddle, which I hadn't logged into previously. We're gonna go with smidge overtime I suspect, but it's not a huge issue. I don't care about enhanced privacy in Chrome. What It should be visible. Oh What is that from? Externalities, public good provision game. Opens today at 5:30, so it should be open, yeah, we've got people in there. There's enough money out there for the good to be provided if everyone tells the truth. But you don't know by how much. Were you able to find the link? Were you able to find the link? Yeah, cool. Someone said they couldn't find it. Wait How many entries do we have so far?

SPEAKER 3
Oh please, here we go.

SPEAKER 1
Why would it?

SPEAKER 2
OK, we'll get a few more. No one should see that information yet, sorry.

SPEAKER 1
It Anyone still going?

SPEAKER 2
Hands up if still going? Be quick 10, 9. 8, 7.

SPEAKER 3
6 5 For 3 To One Bam, exporting.

SPEAKER 1
Exporting, here we go. Good, that's a much better number. Let's grab these.

SPEAKER 2
That's not true, no one had 50. I know what numbers I gave you, no one had 23 either, which confuses me. Does Abby wanna change that? So no one had -10. I'm confused by. Why people just put in weird things here, um. Yeah, but not if people are not putting in true things.

SPEAKER 3
So, I made it, so, so the numbers, just to

SPEAKER 2
give you some background here, the numbers ranged from 5 to 20, and the, as long as the average value that went in was 8 or higher, we said that the good would be provided, right, that's how much it could it cost to provide, was $8 per person to provide the good. Some people had really did have true values that were less than 8, and so they revealed really small numbers, which is quite reasonable, right, and then some people had higher true values, um, and that's all fine as well. I don't know, yeah, OK, because there's there's there's. Let's scroll this down a little bit. I don't have nice pictures to look at unfortunately, um, let's just. Get rid of those decimal places. Um, so most people have done pretty well here, right, so first off, the good was provided, yay. Yeah, well done, everyone. We were not so greedy, the good wasn't provided. Um, Adam Smith was, did a terrible, terrible thing because they they actually lost even though they revealed higher than their true value, which is kind of always about, well, that's not quite true. Might be a good idea, but they went too far, right? Uh, it might be great to reveal over your true value if you think that'll get, no, that's not even true. No, it might be good to reveal over your true value if you think that'll mean the good will be provided because you only pay a fraction of what you, what you bid, and so potentially you could end up with a good thing here, but they ended up with net negative net utility. Everyone else at least got positive net utility. Abby got 0, just fairly. Um, D'Arcy also bid way higher than their actual value, uh, and so it ended up with negative utility, but most people were here getting, getting some positive utilities out of this. Well done to Noah, who really shaved their beard real hard but did quite well, um, same with Anna, um, but you can see the point here is there's incentives to lie, right, and this model here, like it was, it was just barely enough, but if, If the value was higher, right, what's what's the sum of the true values, the sum of the, the sum of people's true values was like 491. So if the cost of provision had been 400 and I can't do that, had been higher. It would have still been socially beneficial to make the good? But people would have been too would have been, would have shaved their bids by too much and ended up having the good not be made and then everyone just gets zero utility, right? It's really only, it's because there was enough slack in the system that people, people lied a little bit. It also means that every single one of you could have done better, right, because you could have bid zero. Everyone, everyone who didn't, I should say, everyone who didn't bid 0 could have done better because they could have bid zero. They could have said, no, I don't want the good at all. And they're not.
