SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Alright, jeez that's very loud. that down slightly. Alright, welcome back everyone, it's 50, so we will get started. Welcome back everyone for our 2nd week now of micro 2. We've finished all our stuff from last week, it's all nice, we know how to talk about preferences. We know also kind of how to talk about um, Budget constraints, and today we're gonna be combining those two things to talk about optimising preferences subject to budget constraints, which is why this is called consumer optimisation. Um, for our admin, there isn't much admin that I really want to talk about right now. We have our weekly consults, they start from this week. You would have received an email giving you this information about where these consults are. You will have red, you will have noticed it on wattle, where that information will live permanently. Um, as always, for all your class for all your comics classes at least, consult times are drop-in times, you don't have to book, you just show up, you get one on one time. I had a couple of people come in today, and they got to have one on one questions with the lecturer for the course, right, who can talk to them about stuff. Um, the other times as well are tutors for the course, so you can come and talk to one on one. They're good value stuff, it's free private tutoring. You may as well use it. Um, the Wednesday time, the time won't change, the location may vary, uh, any variations will go up on wattle. But for now this is correct. But if you go to this room, if it's, you know, week 7 and you go to this room and there's no one there, check waddle, and the room will have changed. Um, that's all I have, oh, the other part of admin I guess, which most of you have already done, is that the first tutorial engagement was due this week. It's still very loud. The first tutorial engagement was due this week, so hopefully those of you that have had ches did that tutorial preparation, sorry, hopefully those that that you that have had ts have done that, those of you that have tats on Thursday. This is your additional reminder, you have to come with, An attempt at the tutorial problems. We're not checking if you're right, we're just checking that you've made a sincere attempt, a sincere and complete attempt at the two problems. That covers the bulk of the admin that I have prepared for any admin type questions before we move on to some content for today. We're all good. We've been nice and clear. Lovely. In that case, content for today. So as we said last week, when we talk about consumer behaviour, we have this big delineation, preferences over here, constraints over here, and that, and those are the things we talked about last time, right, we talked about preferences a lot, we talked about budget constraints very quickly because they're pretty straightforward. Um, and this week is gonna be bringing them together to solve what we call our consumers the consumers' problem. Uh, and we did kind of mention this last week, we're gonna work in two goods because we get most of our insight from working in two goods. You can extend this out to 3 goods and 4 goods and 5 goods and you normally don't, you normally either do 2 goods or N goods, where N is just undetermined, um, but we get most of our insight from 2 goods, so we're just gonna work in two goods. It's simpler. Um, and so our question basically is the, is a pretty simple question of we have a person, they're choosing two goods that they're buying. They face prices, they have an income, they face some prices, how much did they buy of the two, how much they take of the two goods, consume of the two goods, to maximise their utility subject to the limitations that they face. It's a pretty standard pretty standard kind of optimisation idea, maximise utility subject to being within or on that budget constraint. If we want to, we can write this out mathematically, we won't often, but it's nice to be able to have access to that properly, proper mathematical way of writing this out, and let's just write this out, you know, let's work through this to get to get there. So the thing that we're maximising, Is the utility we get from A and B. And we're gonna write this out gradually, we want to maximise the utility we get from A and B. And the way we do that is by choosing the amount of good A and the amount of good B. That's what this this set of symbols, that's what that means. It means this function this value U of AB, which is the utility of consumption bundle AB, we want to maximise that value by choosing, By choosing these amounts here, right, so we get to choose those, but we don't get to choose arbitrarily, right, because for a normal person with with um with who values more over less, this problem is pretty easy, because this the answer to this problem is consume infinite amounts of both goods. Right, because more is better than less, so the thing that maximises utilities have heaps of everything, but we can't because we are face a up, we face a budget constraint. So We are subject to a budget constraints, either subject to or such that we're restricted by our budget constraints, such that our total expenses, Which I'm gonna write like this in the sort of generic form, this is the total amount of money we spend when we're buying bundle AB, how much it costs, because we buy A units of good A. We buy a units of good A, and each unit of good A costs us some amount of money, the price of good A. So this is the amount we spend on good A, this is the amount we spend on good B, and so the sum of that is the amount we spend in total. And our and our constraint is that the amount we spend in total has to be no bigger. Than the amount of money that we have to spend. And that's how we get to this big ugly expression here, but it's really just saying maximise utility by choosing the options that we choose, subject to our expenses are less than less than or equal to our income. Generally, generally speaking, equal to our income, uh, but in principle we may choose to spend less. It's just an unusual outcome. Any problems here, this is the sort of the mathematical description of the of the problem. We're good? Let's dump our maths and work a bit more carefully with our, Graphs, because we like our graphs. Apples and bananas, good A and good B. And we have a budget constraint, where we have this budget constraint here, which is how much we can buy. And so this is calling back to micro one, calling back a little bit to what we did before as well. We have I dollars, we have, we, we, we, we have income of I, we face prices PA for good A, PB for good B. I'm still, I still feel like I'm very loud. Am I very loud? It feels like I'm very loud. No, no, no, cool, excellent. Um, price of good A, PA, price of good B, PB. And so we wanna have our budget constraint. If we spend all of our money on good A. So we're down here somewhere for our consumption bundle. How many good As do we get to buy? Come on. 1010 is an option. Maybe, but it probably depends on our income, probably depends on the prices of the day, in general, yeah. Yep, perfect. I divided by PA because if we buy that many goods, how much money do we spend on the day, will be spent, PA times I over PA is how much we would have spent on good A, and that's our income. We spent all of our income and we spent it on good A. Similarly Let's try to make this not Too close to symmetric I of PB if we spend only money on good B, then we buy I over PB of good B. We can't buy, we can't have both that, right, we can't have I over PA of A and IOPB of B because then we've spent twice our income. One of our consumption bundles is, I over PA, you know, so a number of apples and no bananas, another consumption bundle is no apples and I over PB bananas. And because the price ratio is constant, we can always trade off the same number of apples for the same number of bananas, we could trade away half of our apples and get we could if we traded away half of our apples, we would get half of the maximum number of answers, right? You spend half say sorry, we spend half our money on apples and half on bananas, then we get the point. Halfway between these. We spend 3/4 of the money on apples and 3 and 1 quarter on bananas, we're over here. We spend 3/4 on bars and 1 quarter of apples, we're here, right? And so we can see by spending different proportions on apples and bananas, any point along this kind of line here is going to be on our budget constraints. On our budget constraint, and so we call this line PBC for the budget constraint. Ah there we go, that's why. Um, for our budget constraint. So this is, this is the line that we call budget constraint. Any questions on the construction here, problems, issues? And the comparative stat X makes sense here when income increases, this moves out because you can buy more stuff. The price of good X gets bigger, this pivots inwards because you can buy less of, sorry, price of good A, increases it pivots inwards, all the kind of stuff you're used to. We're then, given our budget constraint, we're gonna break this down into the goods that are affordable, the goods that are unaffordable, and the goods that are definitely are affordable but definitely not the best ones. So first off, let's start off actually with the unaffordable. What portion of the graph here are the bundles that are just not affordable for us here? Yep. Yep. Yeah, up to the right of the budget constraint, right, because those things just cost too much, right, this costs too much because it's more apples than we can buy, this costs too much because there's more balance we can buy, this costs too much cos it's more of both than we can buy. Anything up here. The cost is just higher than I, these are unaffordable, they're outside the realm of what we have to worry about or think about. Everything else therefore is affordable, right, the other things are affordable. But as well as that, we have affordable, we have, we have those that are, Yes, affordable. But also definitely undesirable. What are gonna be the things on our graph that we can afford? But we don't have to sort of think about, you know, assuming that both goods are goods, we don't have to think about when we're thinking about what the best option's gonna be. Pardon? Yeah, perfect, right, anything to the left or if you like below, we talk about below normally but same same deal. Right, so anything to the left or below the curve, anything inside here. Not including the budget constraint line itself, anything inside the budget constraint, we can buy it, but why would you? Right, assuming that both goods are goods, but that, At least in some sense you want more of each good. This option here, right, of course it's option. Option Z There's option Z here clearly is not an option that you're going to want to buy, right, you're gonna want to consume, because you can, you can also afford option, Z prime, which is more of both goods, it's clearly strictly better because it's more, assuming both goods are good, it's strictly better because more is better than less, assuming that, um, So Z is never gonna be the best option. I'm not saying Z prime is the best option. I'm not even saying Z is, I, I'm not saying Z is better than Z, but I'm not even saying Z is the best option, just that Z isn't the best option, because there's a better option. There might be a better option than Z, right, when we're looking at Z versus. Why? Why might be better than Z, might be worse than Z. We don't really know yet, we can't tell just from the, just from the budget constraint. We're gonna need something else as well, some some some other stuff to work with. But certainly Z is not good because Z is better than Z. So we have our unaffordable, our affordable but undesirable, and our maybes. Right, it's anything on the, on the budget constraint, we can't rule out as being definitely not the best option. Yet, at least. Questions, questions, problems. Concerns. Fantastic. In that case, we are now in a position to approach the problem of how do we think about maximising our utility, right, what's gonna be the outcomes that we get in different cases, we're gonna start with the standard case, but we are gonna look at a few of the sort of the edge cases and the unusual well the in some sense unusual cases, the, the, the reasonable but unusual cases. And the first case is that sort of our, as I say, as it has here, our standard case. So we have apples, bananas, we have a budget constraint, gonna make it nice and steep. To emphasise that these things are not necessarily 45 degrees, right, sometimes they're steep, sometimes they're flat, they're always a straight line, but not 45 degrees always. Our person then has some kind of indifference curves, they have an indifference curve map generated from their preferences. We're thinking here about standard case, something like a Cobb Douglas, not necessarily exactly a Cobb-Douglas, but something, think Cobb Douglas as our standard case, right, Cobb Douglas. Or something like that, nice boat inwards, but still smooth preferences, but still smooth indifference curves. As to say these kinds of indifference curves here. These kinds of indifference curves. So these are our indifference curves map indifferent curve, indiffer curve maps, this is one usual, 2 eels, 3 eels, 4 eels, 5 eels. This is more is better than less. And apples and bananas. And so now we can think about what is the optimal consumption bundle, and we can pick a few potential options, we're gonna start with things that are wrong and see why they're wrong, because that'll give us insight into the thing that's right. And so we can start off, let's think about, This option here, I'm gonna call this option. X, X, Y and Z. next What do you reckon? Do you reckon option X is maximising our utility for this person? On Alexis' maximity. We've got a no, can you tell me why? Because Perfect, there's indiffer curves that are higher in different curves that also intercept the budget line, right? X is fine, but like, Why down here, should change colour, but I haven't now, why down here? Y is better than X. Because it's not a higher difference curve. It's still affordable and it's not a higher indifference curve, so Y is better than X. So clearly we have no interest in, like we wouldn't choose to consume at point X because we could instead consume a point Y. Again, not try to make an argument that Y is the best. This argument is just that X isn't the best. Right, so we can find something on a higher indifference curve. We can think of this either in macro changes as we've done here, right all the way from X to Y to a higher indifference curve. It is on higher in, yep, good, to a higher indifference curve, right from 2 to 3 ins. We can think about little tiny changes as well, right, we could talk about X versus like, Change colour slightly, like X, which is also on a higher indifference curve, I've not drawn the indifference curve that X is on, but it's clearly on a higher indifference curve because everywhere is on an indifference curve, and it's gonna be on, This one. Right, which is higher. Questions, concerns. Pronos Lovely. Wis however, is obviously, hopefully at least still not the best, because from our graph we can see there's a higher indifference curve, right, there's clearly a higher indifference curve, the point Z here. Is affordable and on a higher difference curve, so it is better. Excuse me, um, it's worth 4 Uils instead of 3, we got 34 eels. So Z is better than Y, so Y is therefore not the best. We haven't quite argued that Z is the best. Does anyone want to try and construct an argument, and we can talk about either big changes like this again from Y to Z, or we can talk about little changes, right, ways to make Y a little bit better, where not a little bit better, Y prime. Here is on a slightly higher indifference curve than wires. Now I, I've said so far that we haven't argued that Zed is the best, but we could, because Z is the best here, right, Z is the best option here. Can anyone, does anyone want to try and formulate an argument for why option Z is actually in fact the best option? I'll grab someone else if I can, but if not, I will come across. Sure, that's 11 really nice way of saying it. Let's zoom right in. And say, well, to be better than Z we have to be on a higher indifference curve than Z, and even ever so slightly higher, Right, ever so slightly higher a difference curve. Consists entirely of points outside of our budget constraint, entirely of points in that. In that big unaffordable region that we didn't have to worry about. So anything with even slightly higher utility than Z, everything that with so high utility or any amount higher utility is gonna be unaffordable. I'm pretty happy with that as an answer, do you have something as well, something different? Right, so another way we could think about this is if we zoom right in, we see that Z, the different curve for Z is just touching that budget constraint. So that's making us, that's making the a similar argument but in a slightly different way. That's saying that we can't find something close by at least that's better. Right, part of the rationale for why we could find something better than why, right, we had our point Y here, we find something better is because these things were not, it's because the budget constraint and the indifference curve weren't tangent. Right, and because of that, there had to be a point where the indifference curve, You know, on one side the curve was higher, but on the other side it was, or let's say the budget constraint. On one side the budget constraint was below the indifference curve on a lower difference curve, but because they're not tangent on one side, the budget constraints above the indifference curve, so we could find a better a better option, because here we because at point Z we have that tangency condition. If we go a little bit this way in the budget constraint, we're on a lower indifference curve, and also if we go a little bit this way, we're on a lower indiffer, we're on a lower indiffer curve. That's also a very good way of thinking about it. Only applies for small changes, but it is a very good way of thinking about it, yep. It would almost be fair to say when mild rose substitution equals the budget constraint. It's not not exact, but it's very close to what we want, um, and so that tangency condition is very important, that tangent is almost what you said, but the words you used were not quite right. Um, so you said, The marginal rate of substitution, which is a number, right it's a, it's a number, marginal substitution at, we're gonna call this A star B star. At the optimal levels of apples and bananas, you said this was equal to the budget constraint. And I have a problem with this, I have a problem with this sentence, because Ma substitution at a particular point A B star, that's a, that's a number. The budget constraint is a line, a set of points, um, and so they're not gonna be equal, right, because they're different sorts of objects. But you have the right idea which is that the marginalised substitution should be equal to the. Can you take any ideas? Something of the budget constraint. Gradient slope, few people said this words, it's gonna be equal to the slope of. The budget constraint, so we do get, it's the right idea, but this is gonna be the actual result, which is the monetary substitution is the slope of the budget constraint, we have a different name for the slope of the budget constraint. Because we, the slope of the budget constraint, recall our budget constraint goes from I over PA. To I over PB. So the slope of the budget constraint is rise over run, and so our slope of budget constraint is the price of good B. Over the price of good A, and so we call this, Object The price ratio. So it is an important, it is an important thing that we get to, it's a very important thing that we get to, it is our, it is our optimality condition, basically, which is that our marginal rate of substitution, at at the optimal point, our margin rate of substitution, which is the relative benefit of the two goods, right it's the relative margin. utility two goods, that's the relative benefit of the two goods should be equal to the price ratio, which is the relative cost of the two goods, which shouldn't be massively surprising as a result. But this is the argument exactly, right, we need that tangency of the difference curve with the budget constraint. And what that really is saying is that the moderate substitution is equal to the price ratio. And so we get these really nice outcomes, consumed with indifference is tangent to budget constraint, because the marginal rate of substitution is equal to the price ratio and we spend all of our income. This does rely on particular things, or particular conditions for this for this result to hold, it doesn't always hold, it relies on our preference for diversity, so our convex preferences. It also relies on smooth smooth preferences, right, those smooth curves in the, of the indifference curves, nice smooth indifference curves, because if you have pointy indifference curves, you can't necessarily talk about marginal rate of substitution, or if you have perfect complements, you know, you can't, you don't have marginal utilities that are smooth, so you can't do this. But if we have these nice smooth um indifference curves, which we normally do, if we have both in indifference curves, which we normally have, We can basically always have these kinds of results, consume where marginal substitution equals price ratio, and we spend all of our income. Right. We want to be careful with that 2nd 1. If we look carefully, somewhere like, Somewhere like this point here. Still has the monetary substitution is equal to the price ratio? Call this Z prime. Z still has marginal substitution equals the price ratio. But we didn't spend all of our money, so we can clearly do better. So we need need both conditions to hold. Before Optimality. And that's the main result, right, it's the main, not the main result for the course, but it's the main result for like the day certainly and the thing we're gonna use over and over and over and over and over again in lots of different circumstances is mardura substitution equals the price ratio, the indifference curve is tangent to the budget constraint. Is the optimality condition. Or the standard case for when we have convex preferences, convex smooth preferences. Questions, now is a great time. Questions, concerns, problems. Yes.

SPEAKER 2
You have a situation where indifference curves intersect. With that, or is it always just one intersection of like the.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah, it's an excellent question. Um, so the question was, broadly speaking about the integer value problem. Um, do we have to have indifference curves of you equal 1234, and 5, and what happens if there isn't a U equals 3 or 4 or 5 that that is tangent. I've just drawn a sample of these, a sampling of indifference curves, as I note there is another indifference curve here, which has the utility of 4.1, and there's another indifference curve here that has utility of 2.2. Every value here, every possible value of the utility. There's some fudge in here, but we'll go with it. Um, every possible value of utility has a has a different curve, right, so it's not, we don't, we don't say the difference, the utility has to be 3 or 4 or 5. The utility for the optimal point might end up with utility equal, you know, 2 plus route 5 minus 1.2, whatever it is, right, um, could be whatever, it could be any real number. Um, consumption bundles could be any real number, so we allow for infinite divisibility of all goods. It just makes all of our lives much easier. Makes all of our results much cleaner because otherwise you're saying things like, find the real value where on substitution would be equal to the price ratio and then check the integers nearby that for which one actually happens to be optimal, that's a huge pain that we don't want to have to worry about. So we just allow infinite divisibility of utilities, of goods, of everything. Does that answer your question? Lovely. There was another one over here somewhere, yeah.

SPEAKER 3
To Yeah, yeah.

SPEAKER 1
It's just we, we, we, I've only shown the discrete ones but they're all the others are still there. They, we just didn't write them down, right, we, when we talk about indifference curve maps, we only usually draw, we draw some of the indifference curves, we don't draw all of the indifference curves cos there's infinitely many so we can't possibly draw them, um, we just draw a sampling to give us an idea of what's happening. Cos there's another indifference curve. I'm not gonna do too many of these, like, there's one here and there's one here, and there's one here and here and here and here and here and here and here, like there's lots of them. Um, We just draws some so we know what's happening. Otherwise, further questions, questions, problems. Oh yes. They're not necessarily all the same angle, and if you and if you go through the the the mathematics of it, they're not, they're typically, guys, if we can, they're typically not all the same angle, right, um, no, they're not just translations going up of these things. They don't end up in, they have not intersect. It is not the case, it is not your, your claim is a reasonable claim, but it turns out not to be true. Your claim that in order for them to not intersect, they have to all be the same angle, ultimately is not the case. You can, you can and typically do have these things where it's where it's not just translations, but nevertheless these things don't intersect. And so if you sit down with Cobb Douglas and you really actually carefully map them out, um, you'll see that these things don't in that the indifference codes don't insect, but they're also not just shifts in an upright direction. It's it's the way it works. Otherwise, any questions here? Further questions? Cool. So again, under these under these nice conditions, we get these nice results. So what if we don't have those nice conditions? Right, what if we do have a preference for diversity, but we have perfect complements. So we have, as before. And our, our apples and bananas, left and right shoes, whatever, for perfect compliments. We have our budget constraint, let's make it this way this time. We have a budget constraint. And we have perfect compliments, and we'll do a perfect compliments in a roughly in about 1 to 1 ratio. So for every apple we need one banana in order to make us in order to to give us a a U to. And so our indifference curves kind of look, kind of have this nice shape here. Let me just do a The construction line for myself, boom. Right. 1 apple, 11 apple, 1 banana, 2 apples, 2 bananas, 3 and 34 and 45 and 5. We normally actually call these the indifference curve number 5, rather than specifically 5 eutils. And so given this problem That's interesting. So I actually have a I have a construction line there, but it's very hard to see, which is probably a good thing. Now here we're not gonna be able to say something like set the marginal rate of substitution equal to the price ratio. And that's not gonna work for us because when we talk about margin of substitution, if we look at, you know, ratio of marginal utilities, the marginal utility is either the ratio of marginality is either 0 or infinite, always, at every point, or it's undefined, right. Up here our marginal utility is infinite, down here our marginal, sorry, grate substitution up here is infinite, marginal rate substitution down here is 0. Um, marjoro substitution at these, at these kink points is undefined, and so we're not gonna be able to use that mardura substitution equals price ratio kind of argument, because we don't have, Smooth preferences. So we're gonna have to use some other kind of way of thinking about the problem to try to find the maximizer, try to find the the consumption bundle that maximises utility. What do we reckon, what do we reckon we might try and do here? Any take us on how we might maximise utility here, graphically. Yep. We're not gonna do something like utility function equals the price ratio for a few for a few different reasons. We want to have something like a, again, ratio of marginal utilities equals the price ratio, which is what we had here, what we had here. Right, ratio of marginal utilities equals the price ratio works here, but we can't take our ratio of marginal utilities here because we we can't define those things. So what else might we try for? I've made this problem a bit hard this week cos I haven't drawn the utility, the indifference curve on which we would choose to consume. The intersection of the indifference curve and the and the budget constraint. The utility function is a thing, but we know there's, it isn't anywhere on this graph. Perfect. It's where our corner of varying different curve equals the budget constraint. But the same kinds of arguments that we've made before, right? We're gonna want to spend everything, we're gonna have something on the budget budget constraint. But these points up here, they're no good, right? Because I can clearly do better, I can do better by having, by moving this way a little bit, by moving in this direction a bit and getting to a higher in different curve. These are gonna be terrible, well not terrible, but not the best, because I can always move in this direction and end up with a slightly higher utility, right, on a higher indifference curve. The only thing that's gonna not allow me to do that is if I'm at that kink point, and so I'm gonna have to be on. And indiffer because if I didn't draw. Deliberately. We're gonna have to be here. This is gonna be our optimal point, A, B. At that kink point, because then we can no longer do any better. Right, if we consume a little bit more A and a bit less B, we get worse off, if we consume a little bit more B and a bit less A we get worse off. Um, I think I said those two differently, if I didn't say them differently, I meant to, um. And the only way to do better would be to have more of both things which we which we can't do. Um And so this is gonna be the optimal point that we consume at, it's gonna be where that kink is touching, where that kink point there is touching the budget constraint. And so we consume with a quarter of the difference curve just touches the budget constraint because we're spending all of our money. Which we need to be doing, always, and we're consuming our goods in, if you like, the correct proportion. Here it's kind of a 1 to 1 deal, but if you had to have 2 apples for every banana, then you would have to be consuming 2 apples for every banana. So it's really just we're consuming, and that would also get you on the kink point. The kink point is gonna be the, the corner there is the is the where the line has a kink in it. Um, the kink point there is gonna be where we want to consume. All money spent and we're consuming goods in the right proportion to keep things maximised. If we did this, Right, yeah, no, I'm not gonna do that, it's fine. Any questions, questions, problems? With this issue, OK. Yes. Sure. Yeah, so if you're doing it graphically, you, you just, you basically do this. If you're wanting to put it into an equation, you can put these things. Into an equation, and it's not that hard, um, so we'll do it quickly. I was thinking of doing it, and since we have the question, we'll just read it out quickly. This is our problem, right, maximise subject to PAA plus PBB. Is less than or equal to our income. Alright, so this is the problem. And we and our argument we've just made is that the solution to this problem. Is to find the point where we, first of all, Satisfy our budget constraint. Satisfy our, our, our, yeah, I guess, spend all our money. The price of good A times the amount of A plus the price of good B times the amount of B, let's be clear and say these are the optimal levels should be equal to our income. So we we satisfy our budget requirement, and we have in this instance an optimality condition, which says that we're buying goods in the right order, in the in the right proportion, so sorry I don't need to tweak this slightly. maximise by choosing A and B, now utility is, The minimum of alpha A. Beta B. Right, because it recall from last week, the perfect complements, this is what the generic form of the um perfect complements utility function looks like. And then our optimality condition says consume things in the right proportion, which means we should for every, We need, we basically need alpha A to be equal to beta B. I say that, say it that way. Alpha A should be equal to beta. B Because if they were not equal, right, if alpha A was a bit bigger, we would make, we'd have a little bit less A and a bit more B and become better off. Um, so this is gonna be the optimal, this is our optimality condition here, so in the correct proportions. Does that address that answer your question? Good, excellent. You can do a similar kind of setup, in fact. I might. Oh You can do the same thing here for the standard case. Oh. You can do the same thing for the standard case. But the optimality condition looks different, the optimality condition says Maduro substitution equals the price ratio. Right, if you want to do these things in this in this manner, we're mostly gonna do them graphically, but if you have a, you know, if you like throwing algebra at a problem. This is the algebra you would throw at the problem. Questions, comments, yes. Right, we will almost exclusively be talking about this in the graphical solution framework, um, occasionally it's useful to go to the maths to be able to, Work with specific numbers, right, so if we have specific things, specific utility functions that we specifically know the Maldre substitutions for, uh, and we want to know any like specific, here, here's a specific problem. Here is the price of A and the price of B and the Maldre substitution, and the utility functions of this, find the optimal, you kind of have to use this, but if it's a generic, like what happens when the price of a good increases, it's much easier to use the graphical version, and we will always basically always use the graphical version in that, in that case. Like I wouldn't have gone through this except there was a question, kind of thing. Otherwise, questions, problems? Got one more special case to go? Which is our other special case, right, we talk about perfect compliments, and then we talk about perfect substitutes, and so we go and do the same thing again, right, we have good A, apples, and we have bananas, and we have a budget constraint. This time I am gonna make the budget constraint pretty much. Straight And perfect substitutes means that we have a constant marginal rate of substitution, means that our different curved maps are all nice straight lines and they are, they are all then in that case have to be have to be um parallel. Um, it doesn't mean necessarily 1 to 1. We don't have to have one apple for every banana, it's just that the marjora substitution is the same. We always prefer 4 apples. We always view apples as 4 times as good as bananas, or we always view bananas as twice as whatever it is, right, but the ratio stays the same. Um, so if we always view apples as 4 times as good as bananas. Well then we're gonna be indifferent between. One apple And 4 bananas are gonna be on the same indifference curve, right, so bananas are 4 times a bit, I'm actually gonna make this even more extreme because I want it to be more extreme than this. One and. For And so our indifference curves have this kind of shape to them. Right, these are our indifferent curved maps. And More better than less. And so again, we want, and I actually want more of these I think actually, boom, boom. Um, let's just make it easy, boom, boom, boom. What's lots of indifferences? Cos they're all different utility levels. And then we think about what is the best thing to do, well, we, we're not going to our nice result from from way back here was, Look for the point of tangency, right, look for the point where the indifference curve was tangent to the budget constraint. And that's no good here. Because there are no points where the budget where the indifference curve is budget is tangent to the budget constraint, because the indifference curve always has slope of the constant marginal substitution, which is some number that's the same always. And the budget constraint always has slope with the price ratio, which is some other number, it doesn't change for you based on your consumption level, so you're not gonna be able to pick a consumption level to make those two things equal. So our, our way of thinking about the problem from before just isn't gonna work for us here. We're gonna need to have some other way of finding the optimal point. So you don't want to hazard a guess at the thing that is the optimal level, yep. The X intercepts down here, they had, I assume I assume you mean the X intercept of the budget constraint. Yeah. Down here, can you tell me why? Yeah Yeah, it's the furthest outing difference curve, right, because utility is increasing in the direction of the arrow as you say, um, so up to the right, particularly to the right, um, and so what we end up with is a bit of a strange result, which is that we consume a bit of a strange result potentially for our perfect substitutes we consume only one good. In this instance, only the X good. This hopefully isn't too surprising if our goods are perfect substitutes, if we always think that good A is a fixed amount better than good B or worth a fixed amount of good B. All that really matters is the price ratio of those two goods, right, if good A is 4 times, here I've made good A 4 times as good, if good A is 4 times as good, always, and they cost the same amount. Then you're gonna buy good A exclusively, right, you only buy apples. I like apples 4 times as much. Apples and amounts cost the same amount, so I buy apples, which is all which is what we're saying here. These results, if anything, these results are the slightly weird ones, because here we're saying, well, if the amount I like apples depends on how many apples I have and I have diminishing utility of apples, so more apples makes them less makes them less good, more bananas, they have a weird trade-off here. This is the easy case, the straightfor the straightforward to our mind case hopefully. Apples are 4 times as good, they cost the same as bananas, so I buy apples. End of the story. Um, And that's the generic answer here, right? We get pushed to a corner solution. We consume the good with the highest marginal utility per dollar spent. So here, they have the same dollar price. Apples have 4 times the marginal utility and so we only buy apples. But all we're looking for is the marginal utility, what we're looking for is the marginal utility per dollar that we spend on these goods, and we consume only that good. The rationale being you're looking for the thing that gives you the best bang for your buck. Yep, this is so the question was about the, Highly atypical corner case of this corner case, which is what happens if um if the price of good A is $1 and the price of good B is $1 and the marginal utility of good A is 1, and the marginal utility of good B is 1, right? What happens if the marginal utility per dollar of both goods is the same? Because then what you're looking what what you're looking at is a budget constraint. And your intuition's right, you have a budget constraint here and we have our our map of indifference curves, map of the curve, the slope of the indifference curve is the marginal of substitution, but the margin of substitution is now equal to the price ratio everywhere, and so we get nice indifference curves, including this one. Entirely covers the budget constraint or or is um coincides with the budget constraint. And so in this particular corner case, where the mara substitution is equal to the price ratio everywhere, then anything that is on the budget constraint is the best option. There's infinitely many best options, anything on the budget constraints is the best option. You're happy with all that, you're happy to consume only good A, you're happy to consume only good B, um, you're happy to consume some mixture of them, as long as you're spending all your money, you're on the highest indifference curve. Um, so yes. There is this unusual case as well. Does that address your concerns, that that was your expectation as well of what we had what, what you thought might happen here? Excellent. Um, so this is our perfect substitutes case. Consuming a corner solution, pick the one with the high marginal utility per dollar. In the extremely unusual event they have the same marginal utility, then whatever, as long as you spend your money, they're good. You can construct the budget constraints and optimality condition here. Question problems. I've only got a couple of minutes for the last one. Lovely. The last couple of minutes we can talk about our preference against diversity in our consumption. Um, so again, the, this is a weird looking case, this is where our indifference curves are borrowed outwards, which is a little strange. So we have our budget constraint and we have bowed out, you bowed out in different curves. So I've indicated on this graph. Three points that I think, Might be feasible things that we could think of as maybe being the optimum. Take a moment, not too many moments because we're almost out of time. Take a moment, not too many moments. Think about which one of these things you think is the optimum. Take a second The direction of bitterness. Who reckons A, A is optimum. Many. B, B is optimum. 2 cc is optimum. None. 11. I caught you, um, yeah, so. I'm great, this is, this is good because A is is the is the right answer. A is the optimum one, it's on the highest and difference curve. Um, C is, C is kind of a strange, C is where the marra substitution is equal to the price ratio, fine, but C is the worst option, right, of those options where we spend all the money, C is literally the on the lowest indifference curve we could possibly be on, because any small changes, right, even if we just change our change our preference by a little tiny bit, right, move to a different one, we're on a higher indifference curve. Right, this preference against diversity means we don't want to be mixing our consumption, we want to be consuming only one thing, right, preference against diversity. That bode outwards. And so we're not gonna consume a mixture of things because we don't want to consume a mixture of things, we want to consume all of one thing. And so we're either, certainly we're either gonna be at A or B because we're gonna consume all of one thing. And the question is just which of those are we going to be at. There isn't a great, easy way of of working this out, you'd really just have to look at the utility at at bundle A, the utility at bundle B, and figure out which is the bigger number. Um, there's no, there's no, Nice way of doing that, um, apart from just doing it. In this instance, A is on the higher indifference curve, and so A is the preferred one to be, yep.

SPEAKER 4
Yeah.

SPEAKER 1
It's a different Yes, in the, in the weird corner in the weird corner case where. We have a budget constraint, and we have an indifference curve map where these are indifferent. Then yeah, these two are both feasibly are both the equal optimums, are both optimums. So optimal consumption bundles, often unique, not strictly speaking, required to be unique. Because you need a corner solution, which everyone's on a higher indifference curve. That's fantastic, we are bang on time. Um, we will do a lot of comparative statics on Friday, so looking at little changes, we'll talk about taxation, all sorts of fun things. If you have any questions, you can come see me now. Otherwise.
