SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice. All right.

SPEAKER 1
5 past and we've got lots to get through, so we will get started. Welcome back, everyone, for a slightly unusual lecture because we're not doing our usual lecture on our, we would normally do auctions in this course, but given the, as I said before, given the federal election on Saturday of next week, uh we will instead be doing some work on voting. I'm obviously not gonna be up here trying to tell you who to vote for. I'm gonna be up here talking a little bit about voting systems and how they work. We will do a little bit of focus on how our on how the Australian system works, given the context we're in, um, but we're most, we're also gonna talk about, you know, voting ideas more generally, right, how you can set up voting systems in a bit more general sense than that. Uh, I don't have any admin that I desperately feel like I need to talk about, but is there anything that I should mention? Everything's fine. All right, let us, in that case. Jump in. So all of our analysis so far, all the analysis you've done all through micro 1, all the analysis you've done all through micro 2 as well, really focuses on this sort of idea of, here's a set of rules, here's a set of assumptions, a set of rules, um, we're gonna assume people behave rationally, typically, maybe you did a week in micro one without that, but generally speaking, you assume people behave rationally. And then we said, what what happens then, right? Here's a consumer theory, what do people choose, here's a market, how does it work, um, and that's a lot of economic analysis, most economic analysis I think is quite reasonable thing to say. But there is a component of economic analysis which falls under the the the broad category of what's what we call mechanism design, which we're not going to talk about in any kind of detail, but the broad category of mechanism design, which goes for a different kind of question, which says, suppose that we have an outcome that we want, How can we go about structuring our system to make that outcome happen? So suppose we're stuck in a world where we have, where there's only two firms producing some good, how can we build our market in such a way as to maximise social welfare or maximise consumer welfare, or whatever it is that the task is that we're trying to do? Um, and that's what we're gonna be talking a bit about today, right, the sorts of things we might want in terms of how we might build our voting system and some different look at some different voting systems and seeing which ones work well and which ones work less well. Um, we're gonna take position of social planner, we wanna, um, create a structure of incentives that creates some kind of what we think of as the social optimum, right, and typically our social optimum means matches the individual's preferences within our society, right, as a social planner we typically don't have our own preferences, we don't have our own things that we want beyond something like max maximise social welfare in some sort of sense. Um, As I say, this covers things like auctions, of how, what kind of auctions should we run if we want to try and get rid of stuff. Uh this thing covers things like matching models, so when you guys applied for university. You went through a matching model, right, you put in your list of things of courses of, you know, degrees and locations you wanted to go, and then the university put in their things that they want, and then the uh what's the body now, the ATAR body. What's the body that runs ATAR now called? Whatever that body is, takes all those preferences and matches individuals to different universities, right, you get your university offer, um, and you guys got an offer for AU. Um, if you went to one of the colleges here, one of the residential halls here, right, you put in your preferences for residential halls and the residential halls put in their preferences for who, what kind of people they wanted, and then you were matched to a residential hall, right, so those kinds of matching malls. There's different matching models you can have depending on the thing you're trying to have happen. We're not gonna do that, we're gonna do voting, right, and so different ways that you can talk about voting will lead to different, will lead to potentially different outcomes. And so that's, that's very, very big broader view of what we're looking at. There's gonna be a big bull with you for a little while today. Um, when we're thinking about our social choice theory. We have 2 things that we have to worry about. What's the second one? Right, two big steps, what is the social optimum, which is our social choice problem. So when we're looking at our problem, how are we going to define the social choice, the social optimum? What are some desired properties when we think about what the social optimum should be? Right, it might be maximising social welfare, if we have something like a social welfare for voting, we typically don't have that, um. And then how can, or can we build incentives so that we actually make sure that we get that social optimum, whatever that social optimum happens to be. So, is there a social optimum, what does it look like? Can we actually get our incentives to get there, right, in the voting example that we're gonna look at, we're gonna look at the easy version, there is a seat, right, there is a a seat in parliament that is being voted on. Um, the, as a social planner, the question of the social optimum is, who is the right candidate, who is the correct candidate that should be the one that gets elected, and what, and if we look at different voting systems, do different voting systems actually result in that actually happening, depending on the voting system, because some voting systems are more likely to get that right candidate than other voting systems. Now's a good time for some questions, questions, problems, issues. OK. We press on. So one way of thinking about this is our social choice problem, right, we're gonna try and, as I say, first, we identify what is the social optimum. We're looking for that so what is that social optimum. Here we go. What is that social optimum? So a very generic social choice problem says we have a bunch of different people in our society, we have an agents, we have a finite set of possible outcomes, we have a bunch of different possible outcomes, again in the voting system, this is, we have end voters, and we have a collection of candidates, one of whom is going to be elected. Um, that would be the outcome would be candidate 1 gets selected, other outcome is candidate 2 gets selected, up to the number of candidates. Each agent has some preference over the outcomes, right, I prefer candidate 1/2, over 3, you prefer candidate 2/1 over 3, or whatever. And so the social welfare function F here takes that list of individual preferences and constructs from that a social preference. So we have our big list of individual preferences, we build from this a social preference. And we want to have some kinds of restrictions, we wanna, we wanna look at some examples of what this F might look like, what this social welfare function might look like, and some restrictions on what this is gonna be. And sorry, and then some desired properties and whether our examples match that desired property. So again our social welfare function F takes in everyone's preferences, true preferences, and spits out some sort of social preference, whatever that is. Problems? Lovely. So let's look at some. Our first one's our nice easy one. The dictate the simple dictatorship. The Social preference the social welfare function says, here's a list of every person's preference. We look at the first person, our social preference is whatever they think whatever everyone else thinks is completely irrelevant, doesn't matter, right? This is a social welfare function, it is a thing that takes in the list of preferences and spits out a social preference, and so. This is fine, this is an example of a social welfare function. It's not a very interesting social welfare function, it doesn't have a, well, it has some of our nice properties, but there's lots of nice properties that it doesn't quite have, um, but it's a social welfare function that we could think about. As a baseline. What do we not like about this? Well, who, who doesn't, who, yeah, what what what are some what are some potential downsides of this? There are actually quite a few upsides to this, what are some potential downsides of this? Yeah. Yeah, if you're the 2nd person this kind of sucks, right? If you're the 3rd person, the 4th person, if you're anyone other than the 1st person, this is quite bad. In particular, if the first person thinks that the outcome that the best outcome is, I have all of the money and everyone else has none of the money. And everyone else thinks that the money should be divided evenly, then this is kind of bad, right, cos it doesn't, cos then the, the social welfare, so the social preference doesn't really match what most people want. So let's go something a bit different, right, let's do what we call a border count, what is called the border count. So this is the name of the person who comes up with this way of doing it. And so the way that we're gonna structure our board account, there are a couple of ways you can do this, but we're gonna do it this way, which says, um, each person lists their preferences, first preference, second preference, third preference, 4th preference. We and every everyone in the room does that. From that If every time an option is someone's first preference, it gets 1 point. Every time an option is someone's second preference, it gets 2 points. Someone's first preference gets 3 points. So I pick option A over B over C. From me A gets a point, B gets 2 points, C gets 3 points, D gets 4 points. You pick C, B, D, A, C gets 1 point, B gets 2 points, D gets 3 points, A gets 4 points. We do that for every person, every person does that for every option. We sum up, every option's points and points are bad. Right, because The early earlier on in people's preference lists. Uh, and so points are bad, and so whichever whoever, if you have a, a lower point score, then you're viewed as being preferred according to the social welfare function, the social welfare preference. The social preference. So we kind of. And this is OK, right, this will spit out some nice preferences, this deals with our problem that we had earlier, where, Um, of dictatorship, because if I have my prefer if, if I am the dictator and I get to do whatever the hell I want and you all disagree, that kind of sucks, but in the board account, if you all disagree, then, then that's, you know, that will overweight, what I am saying. Um, so board account takes does take everyone's preferences into account, if you like. And so that seems like a a nice benefit. Any questions, concerns? There are 2 easy these are our two ones that we're gonna start with, certainly. And we'll think about these as Mechanisms. OK. So what are some desired properties from these things, right, what, what properties do we think a social welfare function should have? We really want it to be what we call Parisian, right, we've talked about Pareto optimal, this is, this Pariian is is Pareto, um, so it respects unanimity. If everyone prefers X to Y, then the social preference should also prefer X to Y. This feels like a fairly minimal, minimal requirement. Hopefully this is like a a reasonable one to understand, um. I'm gonna tweak my order in here slowly. Um, respect to unanimity is pretty much any functional form that you could think of that is vaguely reasonable is gonna respect unanimity. Unanimity is a very, very weak requirement. Certainly the um the dictatorship respects unanimity, because if everyone prefers X to Y, then the first person also prefers X to Y because they're one of the people, um, which means the social welfare, social preference prefers X to Y. And so our our um. Our Dictatorship is gonna be parish, it's gonna respect unanimity. Similarly, the board account is gonna respect unanimity. If every person prefers X to Y, every person has X on a, on a, you know, lower point score than Y. Then if we sum up everyone's point scores for X and and for Y, Y is gonna end up with a much higher point score, which means it's, which means it's worse. So both of our two, both of our two sort of example social welfare functions are Parisian, right, they, they have this nice respects respects unanimity. It'd be weird if they didn't. Questions problems. We're talking about a slightly stranger one, which we call which is called pair-wise independence, or sometimes independence of irrelevant alternatives. This one's a little bit, a little bit stranger, but I think it's still pretty, Clear maybe in terms of being desired or not, which is that the social preference between X and Y depends only on the preferences between X and Y. And not on your preferences between X and Z or Y and Z, it doesn't depend on other things other than X and Y. So if we think about, if you're looking at our problem and saying does does the social preference prefer X to Y, we don't need to know whether we prefer X to Z, whether people prefer X to Z or Y to Z or or whatever the other options are. The only things that matter are that preference relation between X and Y. Yeah. We're not talking about voting systems, sorry, we're not talking yet about strategic strategies. Here we're just thinking about the social welfare function, we will talk about strategic voting. Yeah, border, border account, uh. Pairwise independence. Should rule out strategic voting, yes. Yes, pairwise independence would rule out stringy voting, certainly. Uh, but most things aren't pairwise independent. Um, so, social preference only depends on the preferences between X and Y. Here, when we talk about, again, weirdly enough, weirdly though it may seem. The dictatorship, totally fine. The dictatorship is. Does, ah, what, what, what's the word I'm using, uh, is pairwise independent, because if I look at two options, I don't know, A and B, two options A and B. Other options don't matter, right, because all we look at is we look at the first person, do they prefer A to B? Yes, well then, the social welfare prefers A to B. Right, so the dictatorship is in many ways really nice in that it has some really nice properties like respect unanimity and pair-wise independence. Where we fall over is, and I'm gonna jump ahead a tiny bit just to get to the page that I want. Where we fall over is in the board account, the board account and the reason why we don't why people very rarely, it does happen that some organisations use border count when they have to do something like this, they have to have to have to have a voting system, um, but I don't believe there's any nation states or any voting systems at a at a at a voting kind of level that use board accounts partly because it is so susceptible to um to the problem of pair wise independence, of not being pairwise independent. Right, so the border account is not pairwise independent, and it's not super difficult, I don't think to see why that's the case, but the best way we do that is we're gonna have, we're gonna do an example, right, so we look at scenario one. Scenario one is gonna have, we're gonna have 100 people who prefer X to Y. And we have 200 people. Who prefer Y to X. And in scenario 2, We're gonna have 100 people. Who prefer X To why And 200 people You prefer Y to X. And so if we have pair wise independence. We should be getting the same answer in each of these in each of these scenarios. In each of these scenarios we have 100 people who prefer X to Y. the same 100 people for X to Y prefer X to Y. We have 200 people who prefer Y to X, 200 people prefer Y to X. We have the same people like the 1st 100 people for X to Y, the 2nd, 2nd 200 people prefer prefer Y to X. And so we should have, again, pairwise independence would imply that this, this produces the same outcome, social, social welfare outcome. It doesn't necessarily say that we should prefer X to Y or Y to X, but it says we should have the same welfare outcome. Because the preferences between X and Y are the same. Any questions, problems?

SPEAKER 2
Yes.

SPEAKER 1
It is Is a reason why the Y is very far away, yes. Other questions? Cool, alright, so let's do scenario one first. So in scenario one, we do a border count, right, we count the number of points. We look at the points for X. X has X has 1 has its first preference here by 100 people, so that gives it 100 points. It's second preference by these people, and there's 200 of them. So X has 500 points. If we look at Y, Y is second preference. For 100 people It's first preference for 200 people, and so it has 400 points, Y has less points, so Y is better. Why is preferred according to the social welfare preference. The next. Yay. Let's now look at scenario two. There's there, are there any questions? Question problems, lovely. Let's have a look at scenario two. Now scenario two has options X and Y, which are in the same preferences, but it also has, ABC A, B, and C, is that enough? Nope. A, B, C, and D. A, B, C. Preferences between X and Y are the same, all that's happened is I've added a bunch of. Of Alternatives And that is a bunch of irrelevant alternatives. Some other stuff. What do we have here? Well, we are gonna find that we don't have independence of irrelevant alternatives. So when we get the points for X, well X is. Our first preference for 100 people. And its second preference for 200 people. So it has 500 points. And why is 123456, 6th preference for 100 people. And first preference for 200 people. I don't know. And so It has 800 points. And so our social preference has X. Preferred to Y. The only difference between these two instances is a bunch of irrelevant alternatives and things that didn't matter. If you were worried about the fact that on the on one side we have um scenario one we have two options, scenario two we have 6 options, uh, you can talk about there being other things over here. They don't really matter. If you want to have them or not, it doesn't really affect the the the question of independence of red alternatives. What matters the the the board account comes up with different answers for whether X is referred to Y, depending on your preferences between sure X and Y, but also how you think about X and Y compared to other stuff. Um, and that's potentially problematic because we do kind of think of independence of alternatives feels reasonable. Whether we prefer X to Y should be whether each person prefers X to Y. It shouldn't depend on whether people prefer XYZ or XZY, which is what happens and which is which is what happens under border count. It also makes it horribly susceptible to um, To not a third party, we're talking about this as a voting system, this makes it very, very susceptible to introducing dodgy options, right, because if you are in a world where these where these don't exist, if X and Y are really the two options that are actually on the table that are, you know, the ones that are of interest to people, uh, you could you could think about adding all these extra options in. And if you structure them correctly, then you can end up with the bad outcomes with a with a with you know flipping what the social preference says you should do, uh, by adding in these additional options that weren't relevant, were never gonna be chosen. So border count Fails this pair-wise independence requirement. Questions, problems? Issues, lovely. As the last one that we would also like just to sort of fill up our, our desired properties, which I'm not gonna talk about in a lot of detail, um, is because I want to mention this is picks the condorce winner. Condorce is the name of, again, name of a person, um, and so an outcome is a condorce winner if for an outcome X, so X is the Condorce winner if for every other possible outcome, most people have X preferred to Y. So the Condorce winner says in a in a 2x2 comparison between X and everything else, X wins. And so we respect Condorce winners if any Condorce winner is the most preferred by the social preference. The reason why we don't talk about these that much is that it's very easy for these things not to exist. Right, it's very easy to have situations where most people prefer X to Y and most people prefer Y to Z, and most people prefer Z to X, and there's just no condorce winner. Uh, and once you get, once you start having lots and lots of options, it becomes less and less likely that you actually do have one of these, um, because you do get these kind of cyclical preferences. We'll talk about more in a second. Um, Neither of the two options we're looking at necessarily pick the Condorce winner. There's no guarantee by any means that these things will pick the Condorce winner. Uh, quite, I think, quite obviously in the case of dictatorship, uh, because only the first person matters and everyone else doesn't matter, so if everyone else agrees and the first person doesn't, well then it doesn't pick the Condorce winner. Um, it's perhaps a bit, a little less obvious with border count, but don't say that's not true. And as we saw in our scenario one and scenario two, border count also does not pick the condorce winner. In scenario two, most people preferred Y to X, and yet X was preferred to Y. So we don't necessarily get Condorce winds. For either for either of these models. Most models you don't. Question, questions, problems. What is this clipping off. 2. Alright, let's now think about some good points. Our positive result. Suppose there are two options available, two possible outcomes, then the majority rules social preference, which says X is preferred to Y by the social preference, if at least half of them prefer X to Y, it's Parisian, it's pairwise independent, it picks the condorce winner, um, there's lots of nice things here, right, uh, the board account does implement this, which is fine. Um, May's theorem says that a social welfare function over two outcomes is a majority voting rule if it satisfies these three properties, and if it satisfies these three properties, then it's the majority voting rule, so he wants, if, if we're looking at something that is symmetric among agents, so it treats everyone equally, if it treats the outcomes equally, so neutral between alternatives, and it's positive responsive, which is a bit of a weird one, and we won't talk about too much, but basically says if more people vote, if, if more people, Have, if if people prefer something a bit more, so if some people flip and prefer X a bit more to Y, Then it's more likely that the social preference will also prefer X to Y. In a loose sense, so it moves in the same direction as people changing their preferences, then what you're talking about is the majority rules, right, that's, that's what we're talking about, that's, that's what defines majority rules. So for, for two options, everything's grand. For two options, things work perfectly. Questions Alright, what about 3 options, 3 options we get our big negative result, which is, suppose we have 3 options and we want Parisian, we think that's pretty reasonable thing to have, and we want pairwise independent, we think that's a pretty reasonable thing to have, then we have a dictatorship, and there is no way out of this, too bad. Um, we have a dictatorship. Uh dictatorship in this context means there is some there is some person where the social preference is just their preference. Um, it doesn't necessarily have to be number one, but one of the people is the person and the social welfare preference just matches whatever they're doing. Um, to the dictator. And so when you have 3 people, if you want Parisian, which I think we all do, and you want pairwise independent, which I think would be very, very nice. Too bad. And it's a it's a dictatorship. Um, it's a really general result, and there's no way really around this. Um, do I have a here? No. When you get into auctions and things, there are some ways around it. In auctions, in voting, there isn't. You just can't get around this problem. So that's our main that's, that's one of our two main negative results today, is Arrows and possibility theorem, which says, If you want these things. Well, no, you can't have them. Unless less your dictation. Any questions? Questions, problems? Sure. What we end up dropping usually is we drop pairwise independence, just to be clear here, right, the way we get around this is we say pairwise independence is too strong. Alright, voting. We're there. We're thinking about voting, we're not really thinking about the entire social preference, when thinking about voting, we're really just looking at the most preferred element. Right, we don't really go into our voting and say, I wanna make, I want to vote in such a way and I want to know who comes first and who comes second and who comes 3. It's just I wanna know who comes first, right, that's the that's the thing that actually outcomes. Uh, and so instead we're gonna use a little lowercase F to be a social choice function that just looks at everyone's preferences and spits out a specific outcome. So not, not spits out an entire preference, but spits out an outcome. Uh, so that's gonna be our social choice function. So you can see how voting follows this, right, everyone goes in, they declare preferences, and we spit out an outcome. The usual structure of voting is a little bit more complicated than that. The social planner chooses a a particular social choice function, so a way that preferences are going to be aggregated. You can think of a social choice function as a preference aggregator. Um, each agent gets their true preference over the alternatives, each agent goes in and makes a claim about what their preference is, which is where strategic voting strategic voting's gonna come from. And then the social choice function implements the outcome based on the claimed preferences. Uh, you'll note that it's based on claimed, not true preferences, right, the social planner never sees true preferences, they only see the claimed preferences. Yeah. Problems, concerns. This is our idea. Alright, so let's look at some social choice functions. One social choice function that we could have is what we call first past the post. This is the system that Americans are using, this is the system that the British use, even though they had an opportunity to get rid of it a couple of years ago and it was madness and deeply disappointing when they voted to keep this, which is just insane to me, anyway. Um, I'm, I'm told the Canadian election, which is in a couple of weeks, also uses this system. It's an American, what I'm calling here first past the post, right, or is called first past the post. It's also the wrong name, um, because it's nothing. First past the post is what is what we what the name first past the post is. Makes sense when applied to what we do, it's the first person to get to the 50% post, um, and that's not what this is. This is just, you vote, you look at the list of first preferences, you ignore everything else because you only you only talk about first preference, you only extract first preferences from people and then whoever has the most first preferences is the person who is elected. Right, 30% of people vote for option A, 20% for option B, 10% for option C, the rest are vote for minor parties, and the person who got 30% got the most votes and so is elected. Fine. Garbage system. Terrible system, um. Huge, huge incentives to vote strategically. Again, you can think of this in the American context, if you're a person on the, I don't know, if you're, I mean this is the super, if you're a person on the far left, you don't vote for a far left party because that'll never get in, you vote for the Democrat Party because. They have a chance of getting in, right, and voting for the far left party may as well be voting for no one, because you're not gonna get in. Similarly, if you're, I mean, if you go back to the 90s, if you were a far right person, you wouldn't, you would vote for the Republicans, even though you would want to vote for a far right party because you, the far-right party's not gonna get in until you vote for a Republican, um. And so everyone votes for people who they don't really want, and you get an absolutely horrible system versus this is all strategic voting, so there's huge incentive to vote strategically, makes it very hard to figure out what's going on. Um, if people were to reveal truthfully, you can end up choosing what's called the condorce loser, which means you're choosing the person who in every pairwise comparison would be least preferred. So you can have a system where you have options A, B, C, and D, A would lose to B, A would lose to C, A would lose to D, and nevertheless, A gets chosen here, right? So this is probably this is broadly speaking what you see with like, and I'm being real general here, but I'm going back a little ways, this is what you see probably speaking what you see with like um rise of Nazi Party in 1930, right, 1932, right? You have, Most people who would prefer something else, but like in a, in a 2 by 2, the Nazis lose against the Conservatives, they lose against the liberals, they lose against the socialists, but because they have that 30% of like core supporters who want them and everyone else is dispersed more evenly you end up with that core group being elected, even though they would lose on any 2 by 2 comparison. Um, terrible system, don't use this, yes. That's yeah, you, you look at, yes, you look at first preferences, who has the most first preferences. So typically the way the voting actually functions in a practical sense is you only mark, you say I want this person. And you don't give any, you don't give any other information, um, but you can certainly, you could extract all the preferences from people and then only look at the first one. Terrible system. Fortunately, we don't really, oh, in the, sorry, I should say, terrible system when there's more than two options. If there really are only two options, this is fine. Right, if there are actually only two options and there's no strategic inter then there's no there's no strategy involved, you should vote for the person that you think is more, that you should vote for the one that you think is higher up, uh, is, is better for you and what's more preferred by you, and it's fine. But once you have 3 or more candidates, this is awful. OK, what we use is a very different system, as we are, hopefully, fingers crossed, all aware, right, this is, this is sometimes called a single transferable vote, um, and it's certainly the system we use at the federal, uh, the federal lower house level, the upper house is a bit different, um, most, Lower houses across the states in Australia use this use this system. The Canberra system is a little bit different, so if you're voting, if you voted last year in the Canberra election, you'll be aware that this was a little bit different then, um, because we have multi-member electorates, uh, and the Senate also has multi-member electorates, so what I'm gonna say now doesn't, uh, we still have single transferable vote, but the exact scenario is a bit different. Um, but the way this works is preferences are declared, so everyone says I prefer I prefer A to B to C, you prefer B to C to A. Um, if a candidate has 50% of first preferences, they're chosen, and if no one has 50% of preferences, the candidate with the least preferences is least first preferences is removed, and then we go again. And we keep doing that until someone has 50% of first preferences. There is a little bit of arbitrariness in here, in that we choose the person who you choose to remove is kind of a little bit of an arbitrary choice. We choose here to remove the person with the least first preferences. You can see how you could instead choose to remove the person with the most last preferences, for example, right, that would be an equally reasonable thing to do. Um, we don't do that. We instead move remove the first person with the most ah sorry, with the least first preferences. So there is going to be some arbitrariness here. Which is why you get some weirdness going on. Um, we will look through this, but this is a much better system. If people reveal their preferences truthfully, then you cannot pick a condorce loser. Because at the end of the day, even if you've eliminated all but 2 candidates, you're then gonna be comparing those two candidates on everyone's preferences, and you're gonna see most people prefer B to A. And then B wins. Um, so we can't pick the Condorce winner. I'm sorry, you can't pick a Condorce loser. You can actually still fail to pick a condorce winner, which I don't like about this, um, and it's frustrating to me, but it's what we've got, which is to say there could be someone who in any every pairwise interaction wins but doesn't win the election. So you could think of a, uh, you could think that the easiest version of this is you have 5 candidates, 4 of whom are the first preference for a quarter each of the population. And one person who's the 2nd option for everyone, who's everyone's 2nd best choice. And then the the candidate who is everyone's second best choice is the Condorce winner in any pairwise interaction, they win 3 quarters of votes, um, but in our system they get eliminated immediately. They get they get excluded immediately. Um, so we can lose Condorce winners. There is still some incentive to vote strategically, there isn't as much. It says we'll come back to this, but I don't know that we'll have time, so I'll say it now anyway, so I'll say it now, um. There's a lot less incentive to vote strategically for a couple of different reasons. There's, there's built-in systems here of, there's enough uncertainty, there's probably enough uncertainty that you're not gonna be able to figure out the best way to vote strategically for you, um, and so you're probably better off, like there's such a high chance that trying to vote strategically will just backfire, um, that unless you have way more information than you could reasonably have, you're probably better off revealing truthfully. Uh, there are a couple of other reasons as well. First preferences, uh, which are unique to the Australian system, not necessarily to preferential voting. Your first preferences gets a small amount of money from the government, um, so your first preference gets something that's about 4 or $5 from the government to to fund their subsequent election campaigns, which is a reason why you might want to vote for your first preference, at least truthfully, um, the, and there's a signalling aspect of this as well, right, um, if, The centre right party gets in because they get a lot of preferences from the far right party, they might go, oh, we need to move further right to make sure we capture those people. Um, similarly, if the center-left party gets in from the far left, then they might go, oh, I need to not be too dickish to the far to the far left because then I'll lose those votes. Um, so there are some, some instances here. Oh no, no, I updated this, I updated this with such a such a good thing to do, and it didn't update. I'm doing it, I'm not doing it, I'm not doing that, but I'm doing something. Um, let's have a look at this. Let's have a look at some, I don't know if that'll work, good. I did this quite as nicely as I had it, had a nice little thing prepared. We're gonna load? There we go. So here we have the outcomes from last federal election in this seat. It is broadly visible, ignore the percentage line, I'd gotten rid of this and made it look nicer, but we've got what we've got. And so we can see what happens. Why is it this way around? I don't want first preferences by vote type, I want the. Nope, I don't want that either. Distribution of preferences, there we go. So we can see what happens, we can see how this actually works, right? People put in their first preferences, count first is that it is everyone's first preferences, and we see different groups getting different amounts of vote, right, so, um, the first one there, the UAPP, that's the United Australia Party, that's been more or less rebranded as the trumpet of patriots. Um, one next is One Nation, next is the Tim Bond Independent, he is the bullet trained for Canberra person. And then you have the Liberals, the Greens, and the ALP. And so you see, at the first, at the first count, no one has 50%. labour almost gets there. Labor's at 45%, give or take, um, but no one has, no one has, um, the, the 50% that you would need. And so we go and we look at the person who has the least first preferences, which is the One Nation party, they're excluded. And their preferences spread around. Right, their preference is spread around, so they're 1500 votes. Most of them go to um United Australia, some to, and then some to various other places. And then we look at the new, and then we add those up and we get the new, the new votes new vote totals, right, the votes get transferred. Um, of this, the lowest is now the United Australia Party, and so they get excluded and their votes spread, um, between the Independents, uh, Liberal, Green, labour. We're now here, still no one has 50%, right, Labor's still about 45%, 1 is 50%. Uh, we look at the person with the least which is, which is um Tim Bond Independent. We get rid of him, we spread his votes around. We get to here, we still have no one with 50%. Labor's getting closer and closer, they're at 407 7% now, they're not quite there yet, um, and so, and now the Libs have slightly less than Greens, and so the Libs are excluded of the Libs being excluded, 60% of their vote goes to labour, 40% of their vote goes to the Greens, and we end up with overall the Greens having 37% of the votes. At the end, Lib's having 62%, Libs have now more than 50, sorry, labour has, sorry, labour has 60%, labour has now more than 50% and so is elected. Right, so this is the this is the process, how how the process works for these particular values, right, um, in this specific seat. And so it's a, it's a process, right, if you did first past the post here. You would, sorry, if you implemented this, if you implement it first past the post, there's two things I want to say with this. First off, the outcome you get ultimately is the same. labour got more first preference preference votes. That doesn't always happen, um, in about, I, I did have the numbers of this, I heard the numbers said recently, in about 15 odd seats, um, the person with the most first preferences does not end up winning. Um, so what you normally see there is something like the Liberals have the most first preferences, but then labour wins on Green preferences, right, labour wins because when the Greens are eliminated, labour ends up, uh, uh, ahead. Is the most common form of that, there are others, of course. Um, I think that's also the case for a lot of the teal independence, right, they, um, the, the libs get eliminated and that flows to teal and teal goes then over labour. Um, so we can get some, some weird, some interesting things happening. Any, OK, we're fine. And that's that's sort of broadly speaking the system that we use, right? It doesn't. Preferences beyond the first one matter. Uh, any questions, questions, concerns, oh sorry, the other thing I wanted to say, um. While in this particular instance, if we look just at the data here, it suggests that first past the post would be a lot easier and would give you the same outcome. That's not necessarily true, it probably is true in this particular seat, but it's not necessarily true in general, because if people knew that they were in a first past the post world, right, in a, in a, whoever has the most first preference as well, I don't think you would see this voting pattern. In the sense of, I don't think you would see the Greens being anywhere near that high because they would be worried about the Liberals winning. I don't think you would see UAP or One Nation be anywhere near that high, no no no they're not very high here, but I wouldn't don't think you see them being as high because those people would instead vote for the Liberals, right, immediately. So people would, would work out their preferences and just vote for one of either labour or Liberal, depending on which one they prefer, um, which might be fine, but it might not, right, depending on strategies and depending on, Um, but people are correct in what they think everyone else's preferences look like, which they wouldn't be in general. OK. Any questions, questions, concerns? Lovely. That's, that's, that's the main one for our system. Um, there are a few other things to talk about, uh, some places use some weird systems, so the French and Turkish presidential elections, um, have a two stage of voting. So rather than having, rather than having any kind of uh a single transferable votes because these systems are typically. Older, um, where the mechanisms for doing this were more complicated to implement and not known about as well, um, they instead have a two-round election, you have a first round where you have 6 candidates, whoever gets the most and second most. Tick boxes in those ones, so you only check for you do a first past the post, um kind of kind of vote, whereas the most votes or the second most votes, goes into the second round. And in the second round, only those two candidates are available, and so you pick which one of those two you want. This has some nice properties, it avoids problems like this this is kind of a a midway somewhere between single transferable vote and um, And first past the post, it's better than first past the post cos you avoid that condor say loser problem, um, but it's not quite as good a single transferable vote, it's just a bit more, more fiddly, um, and you could do the same thing if you just had full preference declaration initially, be a lot easier. But they don't do it that way. Greta.

SPEAKER 2
Is that, is that true same outcome. surely that would be Changes it would be the same thing you brought up early, which is maybe you have a change of preferences when. Sure, yes, yes, no, you're right, so if, if, if

SPEAKER 1
either you voted strategically then you couldn't, if you voted trategically in the in the appropriate ways, then you could have issues, um. I will be thinking about it more in the sense that that my concern here would be more your preferences might change between the voting systems, as in you might be going in and saying, I mean in the French presidential election system, for example, the um, the far right candidate, I believe got more votes in the first round than she got in the second round, um, because people went in and went, oh, I want someone new and edgy and different, and then they got a 2nd round and went, oh this person's nuts, and so they voted, vote, vote, she actually went down compared to the 1st round, I believe. Could be mistaken here, um, that's a change in preferences issue though, as well. So I think that's probably the bigger issue here. Um, lots of weird incentives, right, because, Maybe you want to, in that the example I just talked about, maybe you think that by voting for the hard right person in the 1st round, you'll get them into the 2nd round, even though you don't want them to be voted for because you think that getting them into the 2nd round will mean they'll lose in the 2nd round, and so you get them into the 2nd round to mean that the, the other candidate that you think would otherwise be in the 2nd round that otherwise win doesn't, like you get some weird strategies going on here if you want, if you, you can get some weird strategies going on here. Um, yeah, so some weird things can go, can can happen here. Here it is, that'd be right, I've just put it in the wrong place. Look at all these lovely things I heard, doesn't matter. Um, there are some other systems floating around, which I'll talk about briefly. Um, German parliament also to a certain extent, New Zealand and New Zealand parliament uses mixed member voting. So for the German parliament you submit two votes. You submit the vote for who you want to be your local member. And you submit another vote, and these are both first past the pre like you just submit one number who you think what you want, who you want to be a local member, and then also what you want parliament as a whole to look like, calls the list vote. The local member is just whoever gets the most votes, whoever gets the first past the post kind of system at the local level. And then that sends a whole bunch of members to parliament, and then they go, and then they look at the list of votes, and they say, OK, from the local members, 20% of people were from the uh uh what's the main one, the CDP 20% of people were from the CDP, but in the list of votes, 30% of people said they wanted parliament to be, uh, what, what did I say, a CD CDP. Um, and so they throw in a bunch of extra CDP members from, from the list so that 30% of parliament is from that CDP level. This is really nice because you get the dual effects of having a local member, which people really like, and also you get, and also, but also you have that the parliament as a whole, looks like what the um the population as a whole wanted it to look like. Right, 30% of people voted CDP at the list, that means 30% of people, 30% of parliamentarians are CDP parliamentarians, um, and so this is, this is quite nice. Uh, unusual incentives. But not that unusual, lots of good advantages to this. Um, this is probably, if I, if I go out on a limb, I would say this is a preferred system to the one we use, but it's, but one, what we have is good, this is just also quite nice. We're getting really low on time, so I think all I can do is the Gibbard satis weight theorem and then we're done with the time. Um, all the ones we've looked at have strategic voting, which unfortunately we're not gonna be able to look at. Um, so that is to say lying about your preferences. And so the question is, well, can we avoid that? Can we do better and not have to have strategic voting? Um, can we build a better voting system? And the Gibbard satisfy theorem says no. Says unless you want to have a dictatorship, then you have strategic voting as a possibility. Um, and there's again not really good ways out of this. You can get out of this a little bit if you have, well, no, not even that, um, it, it's just, if you don't want a dictatorship, sorry, if you want, if you want no strategic voting, the only way is to have, A dictatorship. So there's gonna be strategic voting, you can't get around it, you can't fix the voting system so that everything works well because, The theorem says As long as there's 3 or more options. Then there's gonna be strategic voting, and we just have to live with that fact. You can minimise it a little bit, you can make it hard to do, you can put in uncertainty, if there's enough uncertainty, then it becomes less useful depending on different circumstances, um, but it's always going to happen. There's some things, there's some extra stuff here which I don't have time to go through, but I think we will count as part of the course. I'll make this, I'll make working through this a tutorial question, that'll be a good use of that, um, and, That's all we have, any final questions, questions or concerns? Yes.

SPEAKER 2
Yeah.

SPEAKER 1
What we've covered in lecture. OK
