SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Hi everyone, apologies, just trying to. Wrangle the technology. Great, it just worked. Why are you thinking? Just do it. Oh, thank you. Yes. Oh, Alright. We're in. Hey. Some people are excited with me. Um, all right, so, sorry for the slight delay. Welcome back, everyone, for week 8. We're pressing through. Um, we actually have a very different week 8 than I'd initially intended. Right, the normal flow of events would have us move from production through to sort of market structure stuff. Um, but we're gonna delay that for a week because we have the federal election on the, on Saturday of next week, um. And so I wanna do this stuff that's, I wanna do the, the, the, the section, well I'm gonna tweak our section on the asymmetric information to include a section on voting. Uh, on voting structures, not like what you should vote for, cos I shouldn't be telling you that, but like voting structures in terms of how voting works and different voting systems that can exist and which one, you know, pros and cons of different systems, um, which comes in our asymmetric information week because I wanna be able to do a tutorial on that stuff before we have the election. We're doing asymetric information this week so that we have the chute on it next week, so that we have that finished before the election. On Saturday next. All that's gonna sound really silly because today we're not gonna talk at all about voting, today we're gonna talk about something completely different, but it's very much a matter of we're doing asymmetric information this week, part of that is, and that flows in some ways really naturally into voting systems. Um, and so we're gonna do principal agent. Models today, which we'll talk about in a second. We'll do voting models tomorrow, we'll talk about tomorrow, uh, and then you'll have those things in tutorial next week prior to the election on Saturday next. That's why our water is a bit, a bit weird. This would normally be about week 10. We've pulled it forward or week 11, but we've pulled it forward because of the election. Any questions on this, questions, problems, concerns? Cool, the stuff we're doing today is in the textbook, the stuff we're gonna do tomorrow is not really in the textbook because the textbook focuses on auctions, which is very reasonable. We're gonna skip auctions and do voting instead, because we don't have time to do both. So, principal, agent, morals. Um, otherwise for admin, I don't think I have much admin. We're here today, isn't this lovely? Um, cause it's Tuesday because Friday is a public holiday. Again, from next week we'll return to our usual lecture scheduled Wednesday, Friday, rather than Tuesday, Wednesday as we've had the last couple of weeks. Otherwise, are there any admin things I should mention or problems that have occurred, arisen? Exam viewing is underway, you want to view your exam, Google RSE exam viewing and it'll take you to the page that tells you how to tells you the process for this. Oh, exam solution, exam exam marks are out, they're all available, you should have a look at your marks for each question. Uh, sample solution, sample student solutions are also posted, so if you want to have a look at what some really good answers look like, those are also posted, and you went through the exam questions hopefully to some extent during your tutorial last week. So we've done hopefully a reasonable amount of review of the exam material. Obviously if you want to do more personalised stuff, consults. The other issues, problems were OK? Doing good. Let's go. Principal agent models. So we're gonna do this stuff on asymmetric information, some stuff on principal agent problems, and a little bit on moral hazard and its distinction from adverse selection. We've just seen a bit of this before, but we're gonna, we're gonna talk about it again. So we recall. We kind of bury the lead a little bit in most of our microeconomics because we should be talking about microeconomics as the study of incentives. And we do a little bit, right, we do talk about incentives and it is, is underlying everything, but we don't focus as much on it as we probably as we probably should or potentially should. I believe micro 3, the, the, uh, when Kieran does micro 3, he really pushes incentives as the thing that's the thing that drives everything. So, Recall, incentives, right, changes in behaviour, the reasons why people do stuff. People, people are motivated by motives, is the phrases that are sometimes used. Um, so changes in behaviour are driven by changes in incentives. If the price of a good falls, you buy more of it because you're incentivized to buy more of it because now the opportunity cost is lower. Right? If an action is less costly in general, you'll do it more often because it's less costly to you. So you would do it more often in general causes your opportunity cost is better. If you're paid better, you'll work harder at your job or whatever it is. One of these is not like the other, one of these is wrong. Which one of these do we think is not correct? Yeah. The 3rd 1, why is the 3rd 1 wrong? Yeah, right, if you're paid better anyway, regardless of how well you work, you're not actually being incentivized to work harder, you're just being paid better. So what we really want to be careful with is we wanna be careful with our wording, and it's, if you're, if working harder will result in you being paid better, then you'll work harder, but just being paid better doesn't necessarily mean you'll work harder or better, right? It's, if there's that link between um between, Effort and pay, then you might work harder. Right, so these are our ideas for incentives, and this last one's gonna be the one that's important for us, obviously, today. And so we have our earlier work on insurance, suppose an insurance company does a lot of work, puts in a lot of effort, and figures out that you will without insurance break your phone every 4 years. Right, they've figured this out. My phone is about 4 years old and it's just about broken. It is a new one. And I don't have insurance, so this works for me. Um, suppose the insurance company is super nice and offers you full fare insurance. We'll pay, we'll, you know, we'll charge you a 25% of the cost of your phone every year, it'll break every 4 years, you're happy, we're happy, well, we're fine as the insurance company, but you're super happy because you're fully insured and fairly insured. What happens now, right? What happens now, of course, is buying. What happens now is since breaking the phone is less costly for you because you're insured, you put in less effort to protect it. You're incentivized to no longer worry about keeping your phone in good nick, and so instead of breaking every 4 years, it now breaks every 2 years because you drop it and don't care and you don't put a protector on it, all that kind of stuff. And so the insurance company who's charging you 25% of its value every year is now charging you 25% of its value every year, it has to pay out the full value of it every 2 years, they're losing money, right? And so this is, and so they, therefore they would, you know, hopefully the insurance company would know this would happen and therefore wouldn't offer full fair insurance. This problem is the problem of moral hazard, as we discussed earlier. Right, we can, we can recall this from our earlier work. Um, because Your incentive, your, your incentives change, right, by buying the insurance you have different incentives, so you work differently, you. Do different activities. Can I fix the sound here? Not really. Questions, questions, concerns. Problems. Alright. We did all our modelling, right, we did our two good graphs. Of our insurance modelling, we're gonna get some new stuff soon, we got too good grasp of insurance modelling you said expected utility of consumption in the good state and the bad state. Um, it's the probability of the good state happening times the utility we get in the good state, plus the probability of the bad state happening times the utility we get when the bad state happens, or you get from consumption when the bad state happens. And so we can talk about from this we talk about, yeah, the marginal rate of substitution, I'll just actually scroll down, it'll be fine. We can talk about the marginal rate of substitution between the good state and the bad state, which is just the slope of our indifference curves, right, consumption in the good state, as consumption how consumption in the good state has to change as consumption in the bad state changes. Um, we can't do anything with that derivative, right, this derivative, not on. This derivative is fine, it's definitionally true, but it's not something we can do anything with, because we don't know what this function looks like. But we can modify this and put it into our, into our marginal utility terms or marginal expected utility terms, and when we then take those derivatives, things behave really nicely, right, because if we look at our expected utility and take the derivative with respect to consumption in the bad state, This first part doesn't have anything to do with consumption in the bad state. If we take the derivative with respect to consumption in the bad state, that just goes to zero, it doesn't change as consumption in the bad state changes. If we're thinking about the derivative with respect to with respect to consumption in the bad state, all that matters is this part. 1 minus P is just some constant, U is some utility function, the derivative of the utility function is the marginal utility function, you prime. It's just So overall what we end up with, I'll do that with this. Overall what we end up with is. OK, good. OK. Is 1 minus P times U of times the marginal utility of bad state consumption. We do the same thing for good state consumption, we get P times the marginal utility of the good state consumption. This is what our marginal rate of substitution looks like, what the slope of our indifference curves looks like. And this is a big problem for us. Because if the thing that's happening with moral hazard, is that the probability of the good state and the bad state is changing, Then that means that when we take our insurance, not only does our consumption in the good state change and our consumption in the bad state change, but also these, this probability ratio changes, and if that probability ratio is changing, then the slope of our indifference curves are all changing. And so it's just absolute garbage for us, right, if the insurance changed probability, then these pre then this this too good model really just doesn't work very well. Uh, we just can't really use it because all the indifference curves change in all sorts of ways that are hard to, hard to draw and hard to think about. You can do something with this, but it's not easy or obvious, and the graphs certainly don't give us anything because because all the slopes of all the indifference curves change. So it's, it's just not a not a very useful and and the slope of the IO expected value lines all change, right, because P and 1 minus P have changed, so everything's different. And we're, we're in a bad world. So we're not gonna use that, so we're not gonna, we're not gonna go down. When we're talking about our moral hazard problem, we're worried about incentives that are gonna change probabilities of outcomes that are gonna change people's actions or the probability of good outcomes and bad outcomes happening because people's actions change. We're not gonna use this kind of too good model because it's not gonna work very well. We're gonna need something else instead. All this, all of this is to say. The supermodel, lovely, works really well for us so far, absolute garbage if it's going to change the probability of the different actions, of the different of the different outcomes happening, sorry. If the action of the person will change the probability of the outcomes, what we care about here. Questions, questions, concerns, yes. So the issue is that if, if, Let's have a little, let's let's draw up a little graph, shall we? The issue is if we have our world as we had it, right, see bad, see good. And we have our uninsured state, you. Right, then I don't want to use you actually, we have an uninsured states. A I don't know why orange is the default colour here, but it's what it, what we've got. Uh, we have an uninsured state A. And we have our certainty line. Then this is, if there's no moral hazard, everything's fine, right, we have our ISO expected value line. ISOEV we have our indifference curve. Everything's OK. And then we offer some insurance. And this is where things get really, really bad, get get get very, very difficult to work with, I guess, because once we offer insurance, assume I can change colour, excellent. So fun colours. When we offer insurance, and we offer insurance to end up, I don't know, at point B. Because there's less risk, we're less likely to take actions to avoid the bad state happening. And so P changes. These probabilities change. They change in a way that makes the bad state more likely. So P increases, which means the moderate substitution increases, which means that we're on a new set of indifference curves. Right, so instead of if we, if we're using the B, if we, if we're at point B, we had a different steeper set of indifference curves, so a set of indifference curves is entirely different. Because our preferences have changed, because the probability of the bad states happen happening has changed, um, the probability, the, the IOEV line has changed because the ISO effective value depends on the probability ratio between the two outcomes, so we're on a whole different set of ISOEV lines. And The rate of change here is hard to quantify because we don't know exactly how much P is gonna change, even if we did know how much P is gonna change, it's hard to, it's hard to move from P changing to how far, how much change there is on the graph. The graph is just bad for us now because everything is moving, the point of the, the point of using graphs, I guess, is that we can hold a couple of things constant and then look at what happens when some things change while holding the or the other stuff constant. Um, here, everything changes. And so the graph is just not very useful to us. Does that address your concern? Excellent. I'm happy we went through it, be like, it's bad. Any questions otherwise? Lovely, we want a different model, we're gonna have a different model that we're gonna use for the circumstance where um where the, Actions where the action that the agent takes materially affects the probability of the good or bad outcome happening. And typically what we're talking about here are asymmetric information problems. This is this this falls under a broader class of things that are called asymmetric information problems where we know some stuff where we, sorry, where one party to the to the to the problem knows things that the other group doesn't. Right, so we're trying to come, we're coming together, we're trying to make a contract to do a thing, and I have some private information. That you don't, and you don't have that private information or or vice versa, right, um, one side has information the other doesn't have. So when you talk about wage employment, wage employment is a absolutely stock standard example of asymmetric information. Uh, as a worker, you know, to a certain extent you know your level of productivity, you know how productive you could be. You know that if you put in a lot of effort, you could be very productive, but it's costly to you, you don't really want to. Um, you also know how much effort you've put into your job, right? You know how productive you could be, you know how much effort you've put in. Your employer doesn't necessarily really see that, right, especially in the age of work from home, your employer really doesn't see how much effort you've put in. They don't really see how productive you could be if you put in lots of effort, because from the employer's perspective it's very hard to dis it it might be in many cases, hard to distinguish between a person who is not very good at their job, But puts in lots and lots of effort, like someone who spends, you know, 2012 hours a day, 6 days a week doing the job and produces pretty middling output because they're just not very good, versus the person who spends 4 hours a day for 4 days a week and produces kind of middling output, because they're really good at the job, they just don't put in much effort. Because from the employer's perspective, all you see, generally speaking is the output that is produced, not the effort that goes into making that output. That makes sense? Right, there's an asymmetry of information. Right, the most common one, if you have a car and you've ever gone to a car mechanic, which I have before, I hate the experience, I always hate the experience, right, because, They know a lot more than you do about how to fix your car, and so you take your car in to be fixed, and maybe when they say you need to do all this stuff, you do, but also maybe you don't, right? And it's very difficult because they have the information and you don't have the information and you don't really know how to verify that, right? So they know more than you do, they know how much effort's required to fix it, whether they're telling you truthfully or not is hard to know, right? Maybe you're hiring someone to do something. Now we can think about governance, right, because we're in Canberra, the government wants to produce good public policy, they rely on public servants to actually do it, um, and so only the public servants themselves know whether they're actually being useful, right? You might be a public servant who knows that you're doing really, really good work. You might be introducing really great policy, but you might be a public servant who doesn't really care and just spits out whatever, and from the government's perspective it's hard to tell because, Both public servants saying this is great policy, and one might be true and one might be, one might be just saying it's great because they don't really care. These are examples, questions, problems. Yeah, we had, we had spaces. Anyone else think of other examples where we're talking about, you know, this, this kind of problem. I'm happy if there aren't any, but other examples of this kind of problem. There's a clear asymmetry, yep. Yeah, so health insurance is kind of a potentially good one, that's right in the normal colour. Um, Health insurance. How so? I think you're right, but how so? Yeah. Yeah, pretty much, right, so, so this is this idea of. Your health, your health insurance company can see a bunch of demographic information about you, right? They look at you and they say, well, you're uh you're this gender, you're this age, um, you are this height, weight, whatever, right, the standard stuff they can see quickly. Based on that, the average person that looks like that has this kind of risk profile, and I can't tell anything else about you, so I will charge you as though you have that risk profile and then take some, take some extra from you on top of that. And so maybe you're a person who, Is actually really healthy, right, despite the fact that you're a 22 year old male, you're actually a really healthy 22 year old male, as these things go, um, right, you're, you're, you're not the kind of person who skydives or base jumps or whatever, right, um, so you're really low risk. But, and, and the but the insurance company doesn't know this, and so maybe you go no I don't take it. Sorry, I should've done this earlier around. Maybe you're a 22 year old male who the government thinks, or the health insurance company thinks is really healthy, right? Cool, 22 year old males, they don't have problems, they don't get pregnant, they don't da da da, it's fine, easy. And then you're actually a person who does base jumping, right, and you're actually a very, very high risk person. You're getting charged a low premium because they think you're low risk but actually you're very high risk, right, so there's that asymmetry of information. You had to, yeah. He, how so, I think possibly, but yeah, go ahead. Yeah Sure, so you reckon the government is holding onto the, so, so I think in, in principle it could fall into this, I don't know if it actually does, but in principle it could fall into this, right, the government holds the information about whether a degree is, is whether a degree results in increased employment outcomes. But the, but the prospective student doesn't have access to that information, and so therefore there's that asymmetry. Um, in principle I agree that that could be asymmetry that exists. I'm not sure if that does exist in, does exist in practise. I'm pretty sure the government does actually publish, I don't know where, but I'm pretty sure the government does publish or not the government, there are bodies that publish um uh employment outcomes by, Uh, by degree programme. It mostly follows what you'd kind of expect, right? I don't think there's any massive outliers. I think being a vet is weirdly profitable, um, and most other things kind of follow what you think is correct, but I could be wrong on that front. Um, so I think it is published, it could in principle be the case, but I think it is published. That makes sense, yeah. Yeah, so you can have circumstances where both parties have their own bits of private information. It's not the problem we want to work with here. Um, it, it's, it's more it's, it's so much more complicated than what we're gonna work with here, but absolutely you can have situations where both Group A, sorry, Party A has some private information, Party B has some other private information and you try to work out ways to this, um, but we're not gonna talk about, talk about it here. Yeah, sure, OK, um. Yeah, stock prices. So the key word there is insider trading, right, um, you as a random person buying socks, you know nothing. The companies themselves do know stuff and so you're competing with people who have varying degrees of insider information, um, and they have more information than you do about this. So they're gonna sell when it's the right time to sell, buy when it's right time to buy, and you're gonna be stuck holding the bag. Yep. A nuclear brinkmanship, I can see where you're coming from, so you can talk about like a nuclear brinkmanship or indeed a trade war brinkmanship, as we've been seeing, um, where it's where you might know your level, the, the point at which you're gonna call chicken and and back off, but you're hoping your opponent doesn't know that. I could see how that could be a problem. It's not gonna fall into fall into our categories, but yeah, that I see how that would work. Yeah, lots of lots of stuff to do with any kind of secondhand markets, which we'll talk about at the end of today. Right, lots of secondhand goods fall under this, the person selling has experienced their good, they know how good it is, the person buying doesn't really know. So we'll see that a lot later today. I think we've got a good number here, we'll grab one more. Yeah, perfect, right, that's that, that's, that's my, that's the point on governance here. So exactly, right, the public servants say we need this. Like the good public policy is to give us $100 million and the government says, well, maybe, maybe that is a good policy. I don't know. I can't, as the government, I can't evaluate policy, that's what I have public servants for. Um, but the public servants have their own agendas, right? They have their own things that they want, um, which is typically for, I mean typically good things as well, but typically for their go their their department to get more because they see their department and so they're incentivized to to pull money for them. So yeah, absolutely that that I I would say that falls under our our governance idea generally. Does that make sense? That feels fine? Cool. All right, I think we have enough, so we will. Push on, right, any final questions, points for asymmetric information issues. Lovely, so all of these, all of these, I guess, good, all of these, all under what we're gonna talk about as our principal agent models, this is gonna be the the the system that we use for, for building this, right? So this is our main meta model, so it's a very, It's sort of a class of models as opposed to a particular model, um, and it's our principal agent model, so the uh the broad idea here is we have a principal, our principal wants something done. We have an agent, we have an agent who can carry out that task, and typically the agent has private information, has has private information that the principal doesn't have. Um, and so the idea that we want to try and do is that our principal is going to construct an appropriate incentive payment structure, we don't just pay money for work, we set up as we set up a payment structure instead, and our payment structure, Is gonna be so that it's gonna be trying to be set up so that the agent performs the task well, performs the good action, whatever that might mean. Um, and as always, yeah, we're, we're gonna assume that the principal offers the payment structure, and the agent is a take it or leave it kind of system, right, so this is the principal walks in, says, I will give you. 1 million. I will give you consulting firm $1 million to produce good output, and the consulting firm can say yes, oh sorry, firm can say yes or they can say no. Oh sorry, I shouldn't say that one was. The we go to our, we go to our. Mechanic, and we say, if you can fix the car, I'll give you $1000 if it's, if you can't fix the car, try, I'll give you $200 right, and then they have to decide whether they accept that or they don't accept it. You can set up uh the, as, as is often the case with these, the extremes are easy, right, so the extremes are the principal offers and the agent takes or leaves it, um, the other extreme is the pri the agent offers, and the principal takes it or leave it, um. Both of those really just get to who takes the residual benefit, who takes the the the benefit the extra benefit, um, here the principal's gonna get all the profit and the agent's gonna be indifferent between taking the contract or not, um. Getting into bargaining is a lot trickier, right, in exactly the ways you'd expect, right, because how much power lies with which group, you can do it a simple way, where you literally just say, if the, if the total profit available is $100 then the principal will take half of the profit, the agent will take half of the profit, um, which is a. Nash bargaining system, um, you can also do it in a much more, much, much more complicated way where you say the principal makes an offer and the agent takes it or makes a counter off sorry, typically what you do is the principal makes an offer, the agent can accept it or not. If they don't, then the principal can come back with a new offer. But uh it's delayed in time and so everyone takes a delta penalty. Um, if you do that kind of long form multi multi-stage game, um, you end up with the outcome being the same as the simple Nash bargaining, which is the principal takes some proportion, the agent takes some proportion of the of the residual profit, um, so. Yes, but we won't go into it, but there certainly are such things. Um, yeah, we're gonna keep our lives easy by just saying principal offers, agent takes it or leave it, leaves it. Um, it's a good question, thank you. Any other questions, clarifying points? You can, it's not that interesting, ah. The You wouldn't know, you don't, you would not have a zero-sum game here. Um, these games, you can think of these as games, absolutely. They're not, they're explicitly not zero-sum games. They're not zero-sum games because we want it to be the case that that some levels of effort produce more total surplus to be divided than other other levels of effort. Um, and that doesn't work in a zero-sum game, um, because if it's zero sum, then there's no real point to making incentives. Um, because you're not trying to get someone to do anything because there's no, there's no surplus to divide, there's no differing surplus to divide. We'll see, we'll see more explicitly why we can't have zero sum. OK. But I will address the questions as we go through. OK. So for our principal agent models, we no longer have something like a budget constraint, we're we're getting away from our budget constraints and different curves, all that kind of stuff, it's just not the case anymore. What we want to have instead is we're gonna have two other kinds of constraints that the principal has to match in order to make a a, Valuable or a worthwhile um contract offer because you want to make sure that the contract offer that you're offering is actually accepted. It's a bit silly if you're like, I'm gonna divide my design my contract and it's gonna be great. They're gonna have to do the high outcome and I'm gonna get so much money out of them and they just say, no, I don't want the contract. Right, so we need to make sure the contract satisfies this participation constraint. Right, the agent has to prefer or weekly prefer being different between um accepting the payment structure rather than whatever the outside option is, right, I can't come to you and say I want to hire you, I will give you $1 an hour if you make a good outcome, and I will take $100 an hour from you if you make bad, if you make a bad product, um, because you'll say, No, right, if you took the contract you'd make a good product, but also you would just say, no, I'm not taking your terrible contract, I'll just work at Macca's for $20 an hour, $25 an hour, whatever it is now, right, so. We need to make sure we match our match our participation constraint. We also want to make sure that we do actually have the good the good effort being put in. So that's our incentive incentive compatibility constraint for the payment structure, the agent has to want to do the good action, or at least be indifferent, right, we always tie break on the side of taking the contract and doing the good action. You have to at least be indifferent between the good and bad actions. You wanna, you have to want to do the good action, because once you've offered the the timeline here is the principal offers the contract. The agent accepts or rejects the contract, if they accept the contract then they either work hard or don't. Based on their work level, the outcome that happens is either good or bad. And so if they accept the contract and then do the do the low quality effort work, that's no good for you as the principal. So you wanna make sure they are actually doing this, doing the right thing. Questions, problems, stretching. Right So we have our our three examples from earlier, right, for wage employment, the firm is gonna pay you to perform labour, uh for when you're hiring a tradie, you hire a tradie to fix your home or hire a hire a mechanic to fix your car, um, the government, for governance, the government who's the principal hires the public servants, the public servant is the agent to produce government policy, right? We see how our examples fit neatly into this kind of idea of a principal hiring an agent to do a thing. Hopefully. We're gonna divide our world into a few different things, we're not gonna do all of these, um, but we can talk about the amount of information things have, right, we can do our baseline case where there is no asymmetric information, um, so which is the full information case, so we just, The principal and agent both know everything, it's a very easy case, but it's good to have as a baseline. Uh, we can talk about hidden action, so hidden action is where, typically where do I have more data on this? Hidden action is gonna be where it's gonna be the case, the other case that we really look at in detail. Hidden action is where you can't tell whether the agent has done high effort or low effort. You see the output they end up with? You can't tell whether they're on higher high effort or low effort. Maybe they did high effort but were really unlucky. And made a bad outcome made a bad output anyway, maybe they did maybe they did low effort and got really lucky and made a good output regardless, right, cause all you see is the output, not the effort that they put in. So the action they took is hidden. You can have hidden information. hidden information is where you can see the effort they put in, you can see the output they produce, but you, you can't see a priori whether they are a a productive worker or an unproductive worker. Right, and so when you go and you offer your contracts, you're gonna wanna be thinking about offering contracts to convince the high productive workers to work hard, but maybe it's not worth paying so much to make the low productive workers work hard, so you're fine with them not working very hard. We'll see this more later, right, so this is hidden information, you can't see how good the worker is, but you can see how much effort they put in. Obviously you can have both at the same time, we won't do that, we won't touch this at all, um. You can also talk about, as we just discussed with bargaining, you can talk about whether there's um one principal and one agent, or many principles and many agents, or one principal and many agents, all these kinds of things are also an issue. We talk about adverse selection, we're gonna have to be careful with that. Right, so this is why I say this is a meta model, right, this is, this is a big broad class of things, um depending on exactly what we, what kind of problem we're trying to approach. OK. Quick questions, problems? You push on. Typical principal agent problem. With our wage employment example, this is our standard example. Right, an employee can either work hard and working hard sucks, right? No one wants to work hard. Working hard is costly for the worker. Right, they can put in 12 hours a week, 12 hours a day, or they can put in 6 hours a day. 12 hours a day is more costly for you, you lose out on the other stuff you could be doing. If they do that, they make high quality work, or they can work hard, and that's fine, right, you work 6 hours a day, um, at a low cost cos there's only 6 hours a day of work, and you make low quality work because you only work 6 hours a day. Principal cares about work quality, the principal does not care whether you work 6 hours a day or 12 hours a day. Your employer does not care if you're working hard or not, right, I'm letting you know now, right, in advance, will not care. Um They care about how good your work is, they don't care about how hard you're working. The employee, when you're working for a company, you might care, right, in principle you might care about work quality, right, you may have a desire to produce good good stuff in your work, that's fine, right, that's good, you should have that. Like, hopefully you have a work, hopefully you end up in a workplace where you have an intrinsic desire to produce good work quality. We're gonna keep life really easy and say that as the worker, you don't care about the quality of the work you produce at all, you care about how hard it was to make that work. Right, to to to to to produce the quality of that work, so you wanna have lower costs to produce work. Um, And so we're gonna keep our problem interesting by saying that the extra value from working hard, the extra value that is produced by working hard, by having a high quality output, um, is less than the increase in the cost of production of doing so, uh, which is your extra effort that you're putting in. So you can do that you can do 12 hours work a day instead of 6 hours work a day, that costs you, costs you in some nebula sense, an extra $100 worth of effort a day, but you produce $200 worth of extra output for the company. And the problem of course is that it's costing you $100 worth of effort and it's giving them $200 worth of output. And so we need to make, we need to square that circle and and fix up the incentives so that you want to put in the effort. Um, but it is possible to do that if we're in this interesting problem case. This is the kind of problem that we're really thinking about here, how do we pay workers to make them work hard. So what's the wording we're gonna use from now on? Questions, problems. Fantastic. As I say, we're gonna start with the baseline case cos it's the most straightforward, uh, and it gives us a good idea to to where we work from. Our baseline case is a case which is not asymmetric information. Um, effort, skill is observed, we have a nice straightforward problem. The worker has a marginal cost of putting in more effort. And so we're gonna have to pay the worker so that they do the more effort. Firms have a marginal revenue they receive from each extra unit of effort, and the marginal revenue here is basically the price of the good comes the marginal product of effort. Right, so we're getting our, our marginal revenue is the extra money we get from a worker putting in an extra unit of effort. And so Our profit for our firm, our profit overall profit overall is getting maximised. When When, how, when is profit maximised? Profit, you know, overall profit, social welfare maximised here. Marginal revenue equals marginal cost, yay, we remembered things. Um, when marginal cost is marginal revenue. That's our social optimum. OK. Um, There's, there's a weird issue here where we said effort and what the hell is one unit of effort, right, is that an hour's work, is that just like, maybe we're not really talking about 6 hours of work a day versus 12 hours of work a day, maybe we're just talking about working really hard for 8 hours a day versus not working all that hard for 8 hours a day, right, what does effort mean? So it's a bit, it's a bit itly, it's not a real thing, it's like a usual, it's not a real thing. Um, there's two ways you can normalise this to make it, to put it into money terms. You can normalise it as, um, each unit of effort costs $1. It's fine. Or you can normalise this as, um, each unit of effort produces one good. I think it's easier to think of this as each unit of effort produces one good, right, you put in some effort, you make a good. But in more effort you make more goods. Right, that's that's our idea of effort. Either way it's OK, we're gonna, we're gonna do this, we're gonna do this 2nd 1. Um, but either way it's fine. And so this is. Kind of Hopefully reasonably straightforward, right, when we think about how much effort we want to put in. Well, marginal revenue, each unit of effort makes one extra product. And so each unit of effort Produces the same marginal revenue, it's just that the price of the good. Because when you put an extra effort, you make, you make an extra good and that good is then sold for the price of the good. We're OK here. We then have marginal cost though, and so the marginal cost is increasing, our marginal cost of if it's increasing, right, working hard for 1 hour in your day is, and then kind of not that hard for the other 7 hours is kind of a nice way to work, um, if you're doing, yeah, I think. When they've done studies, they tend to find that people can work hard at at at like desk work. You can work hard for about 4 hours a day. The extra work after that is typically not very productive, um, and it's very hard to work for more than about 4 hours a day. Um, you can do stuff, but like you can do 4 hours of really productive work a day and 4 hours of, Other stuff, generally, um, so putting in more effort, as you put more and more effort in, it becomes more and more costly for you to put in, to put in more effort, and that's to say it's increasing marginal cost, and so we have our our nice increasing marginal costs, and so of course our, We have an effort level that is the optimum effort level, and so from the, from the social welfare perspective, we want to have this level of effort be done. Right, cos that'll maximise social welfare. From the firm's perspective, we probably do want this level of effort to be done as well, because our firm can take all of the surplus. And our firm can offer a contract that means that they're able to take take home all of the surplus. Um, we wanna make sure that we do it some kind of optimal wage structure, um, and so there's a few different ways we can do this. One option that we could say is because this is our full information case, we could walk in and say, One contract that works, if you work the optimum effort level, we will pay you, we will pay you just enough that you're OK taking this job. Right, so you have to produce at this level of effort. Anything else is useless to you, anything else we won't pay you. And if you produce this much effort, if we'll put in this much effort, we're gonna pay you just enough that you accept the job and you go, uh, fine, you take the job and you just this much effort because we tiebreak on the side of taking the contract and putting in effort. Um, that's one, that's one option, right, if you do the optimum level, pay them just enough to cover their outside option, if they do any other level of effort, pay them nothing, then, The agent, the bottom, how much effort they put in, they put in the if if they take the contract, how much effort they put in, they put in the optimal effort level. Given that they're gonna put in the optimal effort level if they take the contract, they do actually take the contract, so everything flows down and everything's fine. Uh, the agent chooses to work at the optimum level of effort. Other systems work totally fine, right, you can do a system where you, like this is an, I'm gonna underline an. This is an optimal wage structure. Actually I think I have another one here. Here we go. This is an optimal wage structure, there are other optimal wage structures, right? There are less punitive wage structures where if they perform the optimal level of effort, pay them just enough to cover their costs, and then if they do other levels of effort, you still pay them some amount of money, just not, just not so much that they just you you keep the payment on other effort levels down, that they do choose this effort level. Um, you can do other things that are not lump sum, so you can do things like for each level of effort, we will give you $5. But we're gonna take a big chunk of money from you. And that actually does work as well as a contract. It's a bit of a weird contract, it's not what we typically think of for things like wage employment, but this is a contract system which says to be hired by us, every dollar you make you get to keep, but you have to pay us a big lump sum for the opportunity to work for us. Right, this is also an optimal wage structure, and there are, there are systems that aren't wages that you can think of that work that way, that you keep everything you earn. But you have to buy in, so like a franchise system works in that kind of system, right, um, if you want to open the McDonald's franchise, you pay McDonald's a big pile of money. To, to, to the branding and all the stuff, and then you keep every dollar you make. And that also can result in optimal optimal effort if everything's set up correctly. And it's it's all the same old. Sure, I can see that being the thing, and so you're, yeah, you're you're, you're locked into working for them, so. This used to be the case with a bunch, with certain kinds of university education, um, so for a while back in like the 70s and 80s, if you had a teaching degree, um it was free. But you had to work. Or the department, the department school, wherever they sent you for 2 years afterwards, um, and you got sent to wherever you got sent, and you had to do it, and if you didn't do it, then you had to pay a big pile of money. So yeah, so the opportunity cost, so then yeah, then the the the the payment to them is the opportunity cost of working at that school, yeah. Yeah, so AdV still does the same, yeah, sorry, yes, so that's the example. ADA does the, sorry, my mum is a teacher and was seconded to middle of nowhere for 2 years. Uh, ADA's a much better example, right? They pay for your degree, it's free, it's free, except you have to work for the military for several years afterwards at a lower pay than you would get in the private sector or in the other public sector, essentially. Um, and that's the, that's the cost. Oh, that's my, OK. Um, so full information's kind of easy, right, you pick the optimum level, you pay them lots if they do that, you shoot them in the head if they do anything else, and they accept the contract because it's fine. Any questions, questions, problems? You probably could, I haven't thought about exactly how, but I'm sure it could be done. Uh, this optimal wage structure we have here, I mean it's too extreme, but this, something like this optimum wage structure is pretty standard. It's, it's, You must, we, we don't see full information generally, so it doesn't quite work, but this is the idea of you must come in for 8 hours a day and work for us, right, and you must produce this much production in that 8 hours a day, and we give you a wage to do that. And if you come in less than 8 hours a day, then we fire you and give you no money. So this is a, this something like this is pretty standard, to be honest, in in a lot of industries. So, That's our full information case, and it's fine as a baseline, but we want to go a bit further, so we wanna say, we want to look at unobservable effort. So in many cases, the effort level's unobservable, your manager can see how much production you make. But I can't see whether that's because either. Um, but not how much effort you put in, right? So we need it to be the case that output depends on effort in some way, right? You can't have it just that output's completely random because then everyone always puts in low effort and then outputs completely random, and why would you ever put in costly effort as the agent, right, so there needs to be some sort of relationship. But we also can't have an absolute relationship. We can't have that putting in high effort necessarily results in high output and low effort necessarily results in low output, because then we're just in the full information case, right, because we see high output, we know there was high effort. So the interesting case for unobservable effort is that high output is more likely but not certain to result in high product, you know, in, in, in a, in a, yeah, high output. Low effort is more likely though not certain to result in low output, low output. Because we don't see the effort put in, we can't pay based on efforts, we can only pay based on the outcome that happens. Um, and so the firm will tend to give good wages for high output to encourage high effort. That's our incentive compatibility requirements. And they'll tend to give um and oh sorry, and they can't give too lower wages for the bad outcome because we need to make sure the person will actually take the job, right, if there's some chance that you, if there's some even very small chance that you put in high effort but you get unlucky and make the bad outcome make the bad output anyway. And the payment you get on the bad outcome is being shot in the head, then you don't take the contract, right, no matter how much money you get paid in the good outcome, because there's that chance of the of the very, very bad thing happening. Um, we can't be too mean when people. End up producing bad output because then they won't take the job. So we have these two, these two sort of conflicting things, the incentive compatibility requirements so that they do actually work hard, and the participation constraint, which is they actually take the contract. And that's those two things are in are in tension, um. Uh, I'll talk about this and then we'll take a break and then we'll come and do the do the numbers. This is a numbers one to to see what's happening. Um, so what we're talking about here, we're gonna make our lives really easy, we're gonna have effort can be high or low, and nothing else, right, there's no other effort levels, right, you either put in high effort or you put in low effort. The outcome you get is that either 2 goods are produced or 3 goods are produced. Um, so this is, you could think of this as quality of goods or number of goods, doesn't really matter. There's a good outcome, 3 goods are made, bad outcome, 2 goods are made. If you put in low effort, probably you end up with 2 goods, right, 3/4 chance you end up with 2 goods and it sucks. Right, you, you, you didn't put in higher, you put in low effort and you got a bad outcome, which is pretty reasonable. But maybe with a 1 quarter chance you put in that low effort and you just got lucky. Right, you put in low effort, but it turned out that the thing you did worked by pure chance and you get the high outcome, you get the 3 goods anyway, right, 1 quarter chance of that. And for high effort we mirror that, right, for high effort probably you get the high outcome because you put in high effort so that's all good, but maybe you just get unlucky. Maybe you put in the high effort, but you got unlucky and made two goods, and there's a 1 in 4 chance that you just got unlucky even though you put in high effort. And so this is our, our breakdown, right, putting in high effort means it's more likely you get the good outcome, but it's not certain. Questions on this? No. Um, We're gonna make our lives, we're gonna, we're gonna do some normal things here, we're gonna say that the utility of money is the log utility because that's gonna be easiest for us to work with, uh, well, other things will be fine as well. Um, the outside option is gonna be worth 0 usles. So we, so the outside option is essentially $1 right, because can't go left, bloody hell, um. As we have Dollars and we have eels. A utility function has this kind of shape. Just do that again, shall we? Let's do it right this time? Dollars Us Log of wage Zero eels is $1. So our options essentially get paid $1 for sure. Low if it's free, high if it's gonna cost us a quarter of the usual. And so we can do some really and so we can do some really, really rough things first of all before we go and actually get the numbers and work through it, and we can say we need to make sure that high effort is done, rather than low effort. And so we're gonna need to make sure that the wage we pay in the high effort case is higher than the wage we pay in the low effort case. Right, that's gonna be a, a thing we should really, really expect and we'll see how much higher in a second after the break. Um, so wage for high wage for the 3 outputs has to be higher than the wage they get for 2 outputs. Equally, we're gonna have to make sure, and that's to counteract the fact that effort has a cost, right, to, to make up for the cost of high effort. Equally, we're gonna have to make sure that the person actually takes the contract, right, they accept this. If they don't take the contract, they work elsewhere, they get a $1 for sure. And so we're gonna have to pay them some amount. We're not gonna pay them more than $1 we're probably not gonna end up paying them more than $1 for the good outcome or the bad outcome. Right, that seems unnecessary, we could then probably pay them less in both states. We're probably gonna have a situation where if they get the 3, if they make the 3 goods, they get paid more than $1. And if they make two goods, they get paid less than $1. Right, so that's gonna be the situation that they that they're in, and then they go, well, uh, it's still worth taking the contract because I'm gonna end up doing high efforts and probably end up with the good outcome, but I recognise maybe I end up with a bad outcome and that would then be worse than my outside option, but I can't see that a priority. So we kind of expect without doing a whole lot of work. We kind of expect the wage. When 2 goods are made to be less than the the wage that is equivalent to the outside option, which is gonna be less than the wage when 3 goods are made. It's kind of something we should expect to see. Um, before we do the maths and actually find the numbers. OK, any quick questions? Yes. It's 0 utils rather than $0 so 0 utils is $1. So we're thinking the outside option is $1 which is 0 utils, probably should have the outside option to be $1 but it doesn't matter hugely. Cool, right, in that case we'll take a quick break. It is 40, we'll start again at 90, and then we will work through from here. If you have any issues you can come see me now, come see me now, else I'll see you in 5 minutes. Thanks. Alright, it's about 90 and we have a bit to get through, so let's press on. So we had our unobservable effort problem, right? We're trying to pay our worker to try and make them work hard, but we can't see if they work hard, we only see if they produce 2 units or if they produce 3 units. Um, high effort is more likely to be a good outcome, more likely to get 3 goods, low effort's more likely to get 2 goods, but there's a lot of uncertainty here, right? So we're not gonna be able to go in and just only pay the worker in the good outcome state. Um, because then they just won't take the contract, um, but we're not gonna take them more in the good outcome state than the bad outcome state, so they do actually work hard. So let's do our, let's go through and do our numbers. Um, we have two constraints for what we're gonna offer the, as the principal, we're gonna offer the worker, we have two constraints, we have incentive compatibility, and we have participation. So our incentive compatibility says that we want the worker to do the high effort action, right, we need the worker to do the high effort action, which means we need the, oh. The expected utility from high effort. Use HE for high effort. Be higher than the expected utility from low effort. Let's work out what these things look like first. So we'll actually do low effort first because low effort's more low effort's a bit easier. The expected utility from putting in low effort. What do we get? Well, probably what happens with a 3/4 chance, what happens is we get the utility, Of the wage that we receive when we end up making two goods, right, that's what probably happens, maybe we get lucky and we get with a 1 quarter chance, we end up making 3 units, and if that's the case, we get paid the wage we get paid when we make 3 units. Right, when 3 units actually are the output that happens. So this is our expected utility from the from putting in low effort. Probably we get the utility of the bad outcome, maybe we get lucky and get the utility of the good outcome. We do the same thing for the. Really? For the expected utility of putting in high effort. Maybe we get unlucky. And we only end up making 2 units, and that does suck. Probably what happens. Is we make the good outcome, we make 3 units, we get paid accordingly and we get the utility from being paid accordingly. And then Something else as well, what have I missed so far when talking about the expected utility of the good outcome? Yeah. Yeah, right, high effort costs a quarter of the usual, right, whether we end up with the good outcome or the bad outcome, we're still paying that extra effort cost, and we, the effort cost is that we pay quarter of a usual of effort. You could divide this and say we pay 25% of the usual in the bad state and quarter in the good state, but it comes out the same. And so our incentive compatibility require any questions there, questions, problems? Lovely, um, our incentive compatibility says that the expected utility from the high effort, Yeah. Has to be at least as good as the expected utility. From putting in low effort Which is just some mathematics to fiddle around with, so we'll just chuck them all down, high effort was, Quarter view of the bad outcome. 3/4 you of the good outcome. Mine is a quarter That's to be at least as good as utility, that's utility from low effort. Three quarters you of W2. That's a quarter view of W3. This is pretty hideous. Let's try and make this look a bit neater. What can we do to make this look neater? Yeah. Yeah, there's a whole bunch of divided by fours here, that's pretty ugly, let's get rid of that. Let's multiply everything by 4. It wasn't the only choice, but I think it's a good choice. It's still pretty bad. What can we do here to make this nicer again, yep. Sure, that, that we can do that. Not what I would do, but we can do it. We moved all the things to do with you of something to one side and all the constants to the other side, and that's gonna work fine for us. I would have moved all the W2s to 1 side and the W-3s to the other, but we'll do it, we'll do it the way you suggested because it's, it's much and much less. Um, so if we think about how many UW2s we have, we have one on the left, we have 3 UW2 on the right, we're gonna subtract 3 UW2 from both sides, and so we get minus 2. You of W2. Really how many how many UW3s we have, we have 3 UW 3 on the left, one on the right, we're gonna subtract U of W3 from both sides. We get + 2 U of W3. We've got a -1, we're gonna move the -1 onto the right-hand side, and we're gonna say greater than or equal to 1. This is fine. I think this will be a, I think we can make this look a little bit neater. Um, this, this, this is completely fine, let's do a tiny bit extra. Let's move the minus 2 U of W2 onto the right to get rid of that minus sign, divide by 2, and that'll give us something quite nice. U of W3. Has to be at least Um, U of W2. What a half. So we said in our expect and this makes sense, we said in our expectation. In our expectation here, we said that we think that the wage, when you make a good outcome has to be larger than the wage and a bad outcome, make sure that you actually take the good effort, high effort, and here we have exactly how much bigger. It has to be at least this much bigger to make sure that you actually take the good effort. But log of W3 has to be great equal to log of W2 plus a half. That much bigger. Any questions, problems? Lovely, we also have our, Participation constraint. We want to make sure that we actually are taking the contract, right, cause you could here, go in and say W2 is, I don't know, $0.001 and W3 is, I don't know, $0.5 and then this will be satisfied or $0.6. This will be satisfied, this this incentive compatibility will be satisfied. But you wouldn't take that contract, right? You know you can get a $1 for sure for your outside option. Why would you take a weird contract that offers you less than $1 regardless, right, so we're gonna have to have some other, some other participation thing to make sure you actually take the contract, um, and so since if you take the contract you're going to put in high effort, what we need for the participation constraint is that the expected utility of the thing you're gonna actually end up doing, Has to be at least The outside option. Right, has to be at least the outside option, which is. 0 uses. We have to want to take the contract. So, again, on the left is. The utility we can actually get if we take the contract, if we take it we put in high effort. On the right is the utility we get if we don't take the contract to 0. And so we have to just sort of solve this out, I'm gonna skip one quick step here and just say that this is U of W2 + 3 U of W3 has to be at least 1. This is your total payment has to be high enough. Right. In terms of capability, they have to be split a little bit. Participation says that the total payment has to be high enough. If we go to our little tiny graph that we have here, I can, I can do it that far. Put a graph that we have here. Uh, uh, it's actually, you know, it's gonna be too hard with the size of things, let's not worry about it. Total payment has to be high, total payment has to be high enough and the payments have to be split a little bit. Questions, problems. Fantastic. So let's go and actually try and solve these things then, right, so we need to simultaneously have, At least this, and also, At least this. This is for our firm, this is for our, our, our worker to accept the contract and do the hire firm. On top of that in terms of constraints, we wanna have that the firm is profit maximising, right? This is a firm, the principal is offering you a contract on a take it or leave it basis, they're gonna wanna make sure that they get all of the surplus, right, they're not gonna pay you money if they don't have to pay you money. And so while in principle we want to have, for example, the participation constraint being greater than or equal to, in prac sorry the incentive compatibility constraint being greater than or equal to, uh no actually let's focus on the, the, uh, the one on the right, the the participation constraint. Should be equal to one, in practise, they're not gonna give you more money than they have to, right, so in practise we can kind of just be like, well no, yeah this is greater than or equal to one, but really it's just. Equals one. Because if they were paying you more than that, they could just pay you a little bit less in both the good and bad state. And then they get more money by doing that, so why, why would they? Yeah. The total payment is the easier one, so it's what I'll talk about first, the other one will also be equal as well, yeah. On the other side on incentive compatibility, we also are gonna end up with an equality, with an equality, um, this one's a bit harder to argue, this one's really more um a risk aversion kind of question, um. The firm isn't gonna try and split your wage any more than they have to, because they know that you're, as the agent, they know that you're risk averse, and so the further apart they split your wages, they have to pay you more in total, they're gonna have to pay you more in total. Um, and so they're gonna keep your wages as close as possible so that you're just barely happy to put in high effort, because splitting it further is expensive, because you're risk averse. Um, so yes, we are gonna have equality here as well. That's driven by the risk aversion, by the curvature of the utility function, right. And then this hopefully looks like the kind of thing we can kind of solve, we hope, right, at least for the utility levels. And then we get that other one pretty quickly because this is just two equations like this is two equations and two unknowns, but it's two pretty simple equations in two unknowns, yes. Yeah, so I, I hand wagged a little bit, um, because it's not entirely obvious. Um, the left-hand one has to be equal because if they were if they were more than half apart, right, suppose we're in a world where they're more than half apart, um, then the firm can do better for themselves by bringing by bringing them together slowly, by bringing together by Epsilon, um, because they're bringing together the utilities by Epsilon. By by a little bit, um, which means and to bring the utilities together by a little bit, you're increasing W2. So you're, yeah, you're, you're able to reduce W3 by a lot and increase W2 by a little bit, because W3 is bigger. Um, so it's being driven by that, so let's go to our little graph that we have such as it is. Right, if we're way more than a half apart. W2 W3 We're way more than a half apart, um, you as the as the worker care about your utility levels, but the firm cares about the wages they're paying you. So it's, it's that it's that dichotomy there, right, that you as the worker that the worker cares about utilities and the firm cares about wages, um, if you bring these together a little bit. We try and bring these together a bit. Um, if you give the worker an extra 1/2 a eel and you take away, An extra half autle on this side, then you're saving a lot of money as the firm. For only a very small cost. That's the that's the rationale. So it is a bit weird, and it's the reason, honestly it's the reason why this problem gets a bit trickier because we don't wanna use linear utility, um, because then you get lots of solutions, whereas here you get a unique solution. Yeah. OK, nearly there, solving these is, as I say, fairly relatively straightforward, you just substitute things in a little bit. Um, so we have on the left, we have already have U of W3 is something to do with U W2, so we're gonna take that and substitute into the, the right hand side the equation on the right, and let's go with black. Oh, that's fine. Um, so we get U of W2 plus 3 times U of W2 plus 12. Equals 1, just by subbing in the value of U of W2 that we had from the the left equation. We simplify this out a little bit, what do we get, we get 4 U of W2 plus, 3/2 equals 1. So that's For you of W2. Equals minus 1/2. That's U of W2 equals. -8. So we want to pay you so that in the bad state your utility is -18. Right, so in the, in the outside option, your utility was 0, in the bad state happens, you get paid so that your utility is -18, minus the other quarter from doing high effort, but like ignore that at the moment, um, and so the wage we pay you, I E 8, which is about -0.88. As we expect, a bit less than one. It should not be. OK Um. It's 0.8, which is, as we say, a bit, as we expected, a bit less than 1. We do the same thing for, we do the same thing for W3, we now have U of W2. So we can take our UW2 and throw it in directly up here. And we get U of W3 equals minus 18 plus 1/2. The U of W3 equals. 38 W3 is E of the 3/8. Which is about 1. 45. You've written it down, I had the right answer. Which is about 1.45. And so our outcomes we end up with were kind of what we expected, right, we ended up with W2 being less than 1, which was less than W and W3 was more than 1. So everything works in the way we would have we we kind of expected it to, or I said we should have expected it to, um, and this is the payment structure we offer. We offer, we go to you, we go as the principal, the principal goes to the worker and says, I'm offering you this contract, if you end up making the bad outcome, it's bad for you, fine, it's a bit worse than not taking the contract, uh, you get 0.8, 0.88 instead of 1. But If you take the good con if you if you end up with a good outcome, you'll get $1.45 which is better for you, right, your utility will be 3/8 instead of $0. Um, and you hum and ha and say, oh, well, if I take the contract, is it worth doing high effort? Yeah, if I take it it is worth it just barely do the high effort because we satisfy our incentive compatibility constraint. Right, there's enough of a difference, enough of a gap between them, you go, yeah, high effort's fine. And then you go, well, if I'm doing high effort, is it worth taking this contract and you go, yeah, I mean it's not amazing. But it's, I'm kind of indifferent from taking it or not, so I may as well take this contract and and that's fine. Right, so broadly speaking, the firm has structured a gamble perfectly for you so that you accept the contract, which is a uh a risky contract, um, and put in the high effort and and everything's everything's lovely. And we get some It's M comes here. Couple of things, a couple of quick things to note, yeah, couple of quick things to note, a I think major quick thing to note here is that the value of the product being produced, Did not appear here anywhere at all, which is not that which is shouldn't be at all surprising to you, right, the waves that you get depends on your outside option. Right, that's kind of the thing that determined how big your wage was, and then how split it was here was dependent on how risk averse you were and how how incentivized you had to be, how expensive high effort was. The amount of profit that you earned for the firm did not come up, right, and that's, What you would expect, right, the way your wages are not are not really determined, your wages in this kind of setting, they're not determined by the profit for the firm, the firm is a monopolist, right, they they're gonna take home all of the surplus profit, um, they're gonna offer you just enough for you to work for them rather than to work for someone else. How much money you make for them is kind of is kind of irrelevant for that discussion. Um, that's, that's a big thing I want to emphasise here, on top, on top of the other things we've already emphasised. Questions, questions, problems. Uh, as the other thing just to emphasise is to bring us way back to the first slide. On the first slide I had that dot point we rubbed out which said if you get paid more, you'll work harder. Right, this clearly shows that's, I mean this, this shows why that's not true, this example shows why that's not true. You couldn't just take this person, And say and go to them and say, I would like you to do high effort, and I'm gonna give you $1.45 regardless, I'm gonna give you really good pay, please put in high effort because I've given you such good pay, right, that person, the, the, the worker then looks at you and goes, Amazing, I will take that high pay, I will put in low effort, and when the low outcome happens, I'll go, oh, I'm so sorry, it must have been an unfortunate accident and I got unlucky. I put in so much effort, but I got unlucky, right, you need to be incentivized by incentives, if you're motivated by motives, it's not just pay someone well and they'll work hard, it's pay someone well. If they work hard, if they look like they're working hard. Is what we're seeing here. Again, there are limits to that, but anyway. Questions, questions, concerns, let me go through. Problems here? Yes. Here we don't really have a labour leisure trade-off, we're assuming that you're we're kind of assuming oh the labour leisure trade-off, Comes into, I mean it it's, it's coming into this model in a really roundabout way through that cost of high effort, um, so one way to think about high effort is you spend a lot of time making the product, which is so you're giving up that that um that leisure, and so that's where that, that, that's our way of thinking about this high effort costs is is the the loss of leisure, not the only way of thinking about it, but it's our way of thinking about it. OK, got half an hour left, so we want to push on. Any other questions finally? Lovely, um, for unobservable efforts, unobservable action, sorry, can have that moral hazard problem, so anything where we have a where we have an unobservable action, that's where we're getting the moral hazard problem. Um, if you can observe actions, then, You can, then it's kind of, kind of boring, right, and you can observe whether the person is, Eating healthily, for example, as the health insurer or putting their phone in the phone protector or whatever, um, or is a, you know, is a careful driver for their car, um, then they can then they can just pay out only if you've been a careful driver, only if you've eaten healthy, um. And that's great, right, full insurance, maximise social welfare, everything's lovely. The problem of course is that typically we can't observe actions, we only observe outcome, we observe if you crashed your car, we observe if you have a heart attack, whatever it is. Um, so we only observe those things, and so in terms of payouts you can really only pay out when the bad outcome happens, not necessarily because of the, the, the bad, um, The bad choices that were made, right, the, the, the risky choices, um, so full insurance, in the case of full insurance, the worker always takes the bad option, although the, the person being insured always takes the bad option because it's less costly. Right, so full insurance means you get paid the means in the in the worker case, full insurance is equivalent to the worker case of being paid the same whether you have the good out whether you put in, sorry, have the good outcome or the bad outcome. If that's the case, why would you put in effort, right, you're getting paid the same anyway. Um, and so because of that, full insurance is never gonna be offered, and so because full insurance is never offered, surplus welfare is not maximised. Right, full insurance sounds, sounds great, we can maximise social welfare by putting all the risk onto the insurance firm who doesn't care about risk and taking all the risk off people who do care about risk and everything will be lovely. And we just can't do that unfortunately, because taking on all that risk from people will change their incentives in such a way that they behave in a bad way that makes the bad outcome more likely. And so it's just sort of It is what it is. Um, we can't maximise social, we can't get what's come to what's this is sometimes called the first best would be where we maximise social welfare unconstrained by the incentive issues. Uh, and we can't do that in general, when we have this kind of unobserved effort, unobservable effort. Excuse me. Questions OK, cool. We get to move on and we're gonna talk about something a bit different, right, because we can also have what we talked about earlier as unobservable type, right, rather than having hidden effort, workers have a hidden type. Some workers are good workers, some workers are bad workers. Either type can put in high effort or low effort, right, the the good worker can still put in high effort, the bad worker can still put in, sorry, the the the good worker can still put in low effort, the bad worker can still put in high effort. But the the the the way we break these people down is that the good workers, for good workers it's relatively cheap for them to put in high effort. I'm a good worker and so I can pretty easily work hard for 6 hours a day, right, mental so on desk work, mental work. I it's not that hard for me to work 6 hours a day. I'm, I'd prefer to only work hard for 2 hours a day, but it's not very expensive for me to put in 6 hours of hard effort in a day. Whereas for bad workers, they're the opposite, right? Bad workers, they, they can do 6 hours, but it's really expensive for them to put in, to put in 6 hours of, of high effort a day, or over hard work a day, that much they they're, you know, it's it's expensive for them, that's the distinction. It's just the relative cost. Of the of for the high effort for the high type workers, for the, the good workers versus the bad workers, good workers can put in effort more cheaply. Right, so that's gonna be our distinction. You can distinguish them other ways, this is the easiest way to distinguish them. Questions, sounds. So our big question then becomes, if we have these two types of workers in our in our pool of workers, we have lots of workers in our firm, and we have these two types of workers, the good workers and the bad workers, should we separate them so that only the good workers put in high effort? Right, should we set up our payment structures in such a way that the good workers work hard and the bad workers don't work hard, um, sorry, yeah, should we separate, yeah. Yeah, should we separate these workers so the good workers work hard and the bad workers don't? Is it even possible for us to separate the workers so that the good workers work hard and the bad workers don't? And there are questions, right, there are issues here, right, maybe we want to separate these workers, but maybe we're happy with pooling them, right, maybe the, the best thing to do is we bank happy with pooling the workers, so both the good workers and the bad workers put in the same, put in the same effort. I'm actually able to push forward. There are different reasons we might be happy with pooling, with pooling our workers, right? Maybe effort is very expensive for everyone, right, but it's cheaper for the good workers, but it's expensive for everyone, and it would be so expensive as a firm to put in the money to get people to do high effort that it's just not worth it, right? You can't pay people enough, like the, the extra benefit of them working hard isn't, Good enough isn't enough difference for it to be worth paying them. Um, so everyone puts in low effort because it's just not worth paying people. Maybe the opposite's the case, right, maybe effort is cheap, and so the best thing to do is to pay people, is to set up your incentives so that everyone puts in high effort, right, and maybe that's possible, right, so everyone puts in high effort. Um, And that's, that's fine, right, so first order. These are first order, the first one is first on a first order idea you want everyone to do low effort, and so you just make that happen. Second dot point, on a 1st order approximation, you want everyone to do high effort, so you make that, make that happen. Maybe it'd be nice to separate them, right, maybe you'd kind of would like the high effort workers to do the good workers to do high effort and the bad workers to do low effort. But Making that separation happen, you're gonna lose some of your surplus, right, you're gonna have to incentivize this, you're gonna have to give the high effort workers a bit of extra money and the low effort workers a bit of extra something. You have to give a little bit of extra to make this happen, and that just might be so costly that it's not worth it. So there is some benefit to separating. But the incentives you have to pay to make it work just, just aren't there. And that is also possible. So if these are the case, right, you always want high, you always want low effort, you could separate but it's just too hard, um, so you'd like to separate but it's too hard. Um, these are all reasons why you might be happy just to pool your workers. The flip side of this is, when do we want to separate our types? When do we want to set up our incentive structures so that the good workers work hard, the bad workers don't work hard, and that's great, right? Um, if the good workers have cheap enough effort and the bad workers have expensive enough effort, right, it's expensive enough for the bad workers themselves to put in effort. And there's enough of a difference between the impact of high effort and low effort, so that you get good impact when you split them, right, you get good impact, sorry, when the high effort workers do when the good workers do high effort, um. And there's enough of a difference in, in the cost to the workers of effort that it's not gonna be too that that you're not gonna have to put in too much money to make the high effort workers put in to make sorry the good workers put in high effort, then maybe you might want to try and separate these out. We'll see the examples might be a bit clearer, which is what we have on the next slide here. Um, so we're trying to separate our, we want to separate our workers when, There's quite a big difference in impact between high and low effort and hopefully it's there's a reasonable spread of of costs for the worker between doing high effort and low effort. And so we can hopefully probably see, well hopefully we just could go down there, right, if we talk about McDonald's frontline workers, right, people working at the stove in Maccers. What do we reckon here? Are we gonna try and separate these people or pool these people? Everyone's laughing, so everyone's saying pooling these people, right, we're gonna pay them the same and, and that'll be fine. Um, which kind of world do we reckon we're in? Do you reckon we're in the 1st, 2nd or 3rd world for MACA's frontline workers? Yeah. First world? Yeah, effort's very expensive, you have to put in, you have to give them a lot of like, it's hard to do this, effort's expensive, it doesn't really make a huge difference whether the whether the people are putting in lots of effort and, you know, flipping things at exact like doing things exactly perfectly and ending up with a, a burger that's 5% better, um, cause the, And that's that's gonna be hard for them to do, but the difference it makes in terms of product is pretty small, um, and so we're kind of in this first world. Eff's expensive, the impact of effort's pretty low, so we're just gonna have everyone do low effort, right? If you're a good worker, that's, you're, you're happy because you're putting in low, like you're happy, if you're putting in low effort, this is great and not very costly. If you're a bad worker, you're still putting in low effort, you're still OK, right, we just pool everyone. As bad workers, as low effort workers, I shouldn't say bad workers, as low effort workers. Um, the other three, I think fall into the same sort of category, which is things where we potentially at least want to think about separating, separating equilibrium, right, the impact that we get for these kinds of professions, um, between workers who put in high effort and make lots of product, lots of high quality product, and workers who put in low effort and make not very much product is very different. Right, there's a big difference in the quality of product that gets spat out at the end, uh, whether people are put in high effort or low effort. At the same time, there's a big difference in the innate ability of the particular employee as to whether they're a good employee or a bad employer, or they're an innately productive employee or an innately not that productive employee, right? You talk about there being great lawyers and not so great lawyers, and the great lawyers might put in more effort because they get paid phenomenal wages, right? You might be a great lawyer who works 60 hours a week and gets paid monstrous. Amounts of money, right, and you might be a bad lawyer who works 20 hours a week and gets paid kind of badly, right? Um, so there's a big a a wide range of these things. Lawyers are probably the strongest of the, well, university faculty, lawyers are probably some of the strongest of these. I don't know that much about accountants. I suspect that there's a bit of a, there's a somewhat narrower, um, pay differential with the exception of people who are getting paid unbelievable astronomical amounts of money, um, in accounting. So we probably want to be thinking about separating the other three, right, because there's a big difference in impact between high and low effort, and there's a big difference in innate productivities when you're in these worlds. Um, and that's what we see, right, when we look at our data, that's what we see, if you go to McDonald's, you get paid. A fixed wage, you get paid your $25 an hour and you sit there and you do your work and you've been higher or lower effort, it doesn't really matter as long as you meet the minimum benchmarks, you're good, right? And the minimum benchmarks are, are reasonably high, I'm not saying it's an easy job because it's not an easy job, but you get paid the same regardless. There's no separating. Whereas in the other three cases we do see separating happen, right? There are university faculty who get paid a lot more than I do. There are not that many who get paid less than I do, but there are a lot of people who get paid a lot more than I do. Um, all of the university faculties is done by seniority, um, lawyers and accountants you see big differences in pay, right, especially lawyers, big, big differences in pay, which are basically a separating equilibrium. OK. Any questions? Questions, problems? Yeah Finally, just to sort of, well, just to sort of round this out a little bit, um, how do we go about making the separation actually happen? We pay different amounts for different outputs. Is the short answer. You want to be really careful with how you do this, if you are doing a separate equilibrium within a firm, you wanna be really careful with how you do this, um, You need to pick the amounts really carefully so that your bad worker doesn't want to pretend to be a good worker. This one sounds silly, right, because it's like, oh no, our bad workers are putting in high effort, um, which seems like a good thing from the firm's perspective. The problem is if you're in, if your payment structure is such that your bad workers are putting in high effort, you're paying too much for high effort. Right, because for your bad workers putting that high if it's really expensive, so if they're choosing to do that, that's like, you're putting, you're giving them a lot of incentive there. You probably you could dial down the incentive, right, you could pay a lot less for high effort and your good workers will still keep doing high effort cos it's not very costly for them. Um Yeah, so if you're, if your bad workers are pretending to be good workers, that's bad because you're overly incentivizing. You also want your good workers to be pretending to be bad workers, right? You don't want you don't want your good workers to be putting in low effort, um, because then you're not incentivizing enough, right, then you need to incentivize them more, um. So you need to do this, right, you need to force them to to to reveal their goodness or badness by exploiting differences in cost of effort. We're not gonna do this, we're not gonna do the mathematics to show this, cos it's a huge pain at the mathematics to show you this. We're just gonna argue that, um, the results for such a payment schedule, broadly speaking, are that your good worker produces a little bit less than they would at the social optimum level, um, but they put in lots of effort and they're paid well, right, they're paid well, they put in effort, but they make a little bit less, produces lots, sorry, puts lots of effort and it's paid well, that's all I left, right, um. The bad worker produces little, puts in little effort and is paid poorly, these are the things you would expect. The things to make the incentives work, just barely, is that your good worker has to be given a little bit more money, just a little bit more money than they need, um, otherwise they'll pretend to be a bad worker, right, because they still do prefer to do a lot of effort, so you have to pay them a little bit extra, um, and your bad worker's gonna work a little bit, a little bit less hard than is socially optimal, um, otherwise they pretend to be, otherwise they have an incentive to pretend to be a good worker. Um, so you have to set these things up in this way. Uh, this is, this is the optimal way to set these things up. And so you can see that there is a cost to making a separating equilibrium happen. And the cost is for the firm, there's a cost to making a separating equilibrium. There's a cost of a good worker, you have to pay the good worker more than the social optimum, right? You have to pay them a bit extra so that they reveal that they're so so that they reveal that they're a good worker. For the bad worker, you have to have them work a little bit less hard than would be socially optimum. Uh, because otherwise, so, so, so that they choose to reveal that they're a bad worker. Um, so There is costs to the firm of making the separation happen, so it might be worthwhile, but it might not. OK, 5 minutes you'll be right. Questions, concerns. I don't know, 2 hour lecture, we're nearly done. Within this we can talk about types of equilibria, so there's two types of equilibria within a competitive environment, so there's lots of firms and there's lots of agents, and these and lots of workers, some of the workers are good, some of the workers are bad. Um, we end up with two classes of symmetric equilibria, so two main classes of equilibria, we get a pooling equilibrium, which is the optimal contract is all workers do the same amount of work. Right, all workers put in the same effort, they do the same work. This is our pooling equilibrium. Um, we can also have separating equilibrium, where separating equilibria is where the optimal contracts mean that the high and low quality workers do different amounts of work, so we separate them out and our work, our good workers do high effort, our bad workers do low effort. And as I say, the principal faces this trade-off between needing to pay the incentives to make sure the separation happens. These last two dot points, the costs of making separating happens. Versus the benefit of separating hap making separating happen, which is which is increased production, um, so they have to, you need to pay the incentives versus just having a moderate level of output from both types, which is the which is the alternative option. The reason we're bringing, so these are our two equilibria, cooling, separating. What's tricky is that in the presence of something like adverse selection, we can have the entire system collapse. Right, so if we have lots of firms, so we're in a competitive world, properly competitive world, lots of firms, um, and lots of potential firms that could enter the market. So perfect think perfect competition from micro one. Um, in some cases we might just not have an equilibrium to this problem, which is bad, right, so there's no way to square this circle, there's no way to make the, make the problem work. Um, you can have, there's no pooling equilibrium, because if we look at the optimal pooling equilibrium where the good workers and the bad workers are all doing the same thing, you could have an outside firm come into the market, look at this and go, ooh, I can offer a contract that only poaches good workers. But I can do that. I can you can set up an appropriate contract so that we're only gonna grab those good workers and the bad workers aren't gonna be grabbed anymore, aren't gonna be grabbed, right, they're not, they're not. We're not gonna worry about them. Um. And so the good workers go to that new firm and we start to move towards maybe separating equilibrium, but maybe that's not optimal, right? Um, if there's enough good workers, there might not be a separating equilibrium because it's better, it's better to not offer the high incentives and just let in the low quality workers, right? So once we start getting too many high quality workers in your firm, you wanna have some low quality ones as well and you end up with a horrible problem of, oh sorry, you, you pull in all these good workers, then there's all these bad workers. And we start to separate, but maybe we can't separate fully cause there's two, there's there's a, there's the wrong proportions of good and bad workers, um, which is a bit of a fiddly thing, um, and we end up with nothing happening. I said this poorly, but the problem that we have here is our adverse selection. Problem. This thing, actually I'll take you say quickly, this thing, this, there's no pulling equilibrium for the optimal pulling equilibrium outside firm Centre, I think of this the, the, for my, for me the example of this is Aldi. Right, we had Coles and Woolworths, and they hired their workers and they had a pooling equilibrium. You wanted to be a person who worked at a supermarket, you worked at Coles, or you worked at woollies, and they were pooled and were paid terribly. If you're a good supermarket worker, you got paid kind of badly, if you're a bad supermarket worker, you got paid kind of well, um, conditional on the quality of the work you were producing. Aldi comes in, Aldi comes in and says we're gonna pay you more. Cos they pay more than Coles and Woolworths. We're also gonna work you harder, right, if you come here, come here, you're gonna get more money, but you have to work harder. And so if you're one of the people who work for Coles and woollies, you're sitting there going, oh, I'm a good worker, and I'm getting paid terribly at Coles and Woolworths. I'm gonna go and work for Aldi instead. Yeah, I'll have to work harder, but I'm a good worker, so that's fine, and then I'll get more money. Right, whereas if you're a bad worker at Coles and Woolworths, you go, ah. Yeah, I know Aldi pays more, they're gonna make me work hard. I have to like do stuff all day, I can't just, you know, whatever. Well, I'm not, I'm not gonna do that. I'm I'm out, I'm gonna stay at Coles and Woolworth and get paid well for the quality of work that I'm producing. Um, and so we syphon away all those good workers. The problem is that then Coles and Woolworths start to have more and more bad workers, and whether this ends up with a separating equilibrium, then Coles and Woolworths maybe start having to pay more until you get back to maybe it's a new pooling equilibrium, but if you get back to a new pooling equilibrium where everyone's paying the same wages, then maybe a new firm could enter into the market and again take the cream of the crop off the top, um, until we rebalance, and then a new firm enters and takes the cream off the top, and so on, yeah. I think firms are opposed to banning noncomple causes, clauses I don't think so. I think the reason why firms like non-compete clauses is it reduces the, Uh, wages that you end up, reduces the, the bargaining power of your employees, right, because if you have a non-complete clause, then you can't work anywhere else, so you're gonna take the terrible pay that we give you, um, and I think they're opposed to banning them because they like to use them. I don't, I don't think it's related here. Uh, we're a bit low on time, so I want to just want to emphasise one or two last little things. We talked and we did talk about this earlier, but I want to emphasise it again, right, moral hazards and adverse selection are, Said together, but they're very much different objects, right, moral hazard is because I take on a new contract, my incentives have changed, and so now I'm more likely to take the bad action. That's what moral hazard is. I have health insurance, I know that I'm gonna be fine, uh, from a health perspective, I'm gonna go base jumping. Right, because I have the health insurance. This is quite different to, sorry, I shouldn't eat terribly whatever. This is different to adverse selection, which is because of the contracts that are available out there in the world, the good agents, they aren't gonna take these contracts and the market will be swamped by bad agents, right? I know that I'm healthy, I'm a good agent, I'm healthy. I'm looking at all these, this slew of health insurance options. I'm not taking those because they're all for the average person and I'm a healthy person, so I don't need those, and they won't help me at all, so I just don't take them. Whereas the unhealthy people are looking at these options and going, oh, these are all great, I'm gonna take, I'm gonna take the one that's the one that's best for me. Um, and so what happens is only bad agents buy the health insurance, or only down the healthy people buy the health insurance. Um, So, yeah, I think I've just said that how do these work in practise. Exactly this, um, they're clearly different phenomena, right, one is an e-selection issue, one is a change of action issue, one is an incentive issue, um, and so they're just, they're just different things. They often affect the same kinds of markets because they're both issues from that arise from asymmetric information, um, but they are very much different, different issues, um, which have different different things that have different issues associated with them. Um, In the Australian context, the Howard government, some time ago now, had an ingenious and absolutely terrible way um of dealing with the adverse selection issue in the Australian context for private health insurance, um, so, In private health insurance in the early 90s, private health insurance is very uncommon in Australia, right, we have a good public system, so the only people who would be interested in taking private health insurance are either the very, very wealthy for whom money doesn't really matter, or they're people who are very, very sick, right, but given that only the very wealthy or mainly the very sick are taking health insurance, the premiums become very, very high because the insurance companies need to break even, right, you have an adverse selection problem. Um, and so if you wanted to support the private health insurance industry, what would you do? What was done, you know it was done? Yeah. You're not quite forced to, but broadly speaking you're forced to, yeah, do you know what was done? Yeah. Yeah, exactly, right, so it's a, it's it's not forced, but it's incentivized strongly through the tax system, so if you don't have health in private health insurance, then you pay an extra 2%. Um, Medicare levy surcharge, uh, if you earn over a certain amount, um, there's also an additional one that they brought in, which is the, like the over 30, so for.
