SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
All right. Welcome back everyone, on our first chilly morning of the year. How's everyone's walk across to the thing. It's nice, it's fresh, or it's just cold? The cycling was, I didn't bring gloves, the cycling was an interesting experience. Um, today we're gonna finish up, we're gonna continue our work from last time, and it is just a complete flow on from last time. Last time we talked about uh well we talked about, uh, profit maximisation. And we're gonna leave that through into perfect competition. Some of this is stuff you have, especially the perfect competition stuff, some of it is stuff you would have seen in micro one, some of it's gonna be rehash of stuff you've seen in micro one. It's gonna be new stuff as well, as is sort of the normal for for what we're doing. We're also often gonna be a little bit more careful in terms of how we talk about stuff, a little bit more careful, well, not heaps, but a bit more. So last time we talked about marginal revenue and we were we were clear with our marginal revenue and so marginal revenue is how revenue changes when you change quantity, and it's not just price, it's price times this this other thing here that's that's often less than one. So typically marginal revenue is gonna be less than price in the unusual case of competitive industries of competitive markets where there's, you know, infinitely many very, very small firms, um, then marginal revenue is actually equal to price, but it's kind of an outlying case. It's the one we're gonna work with mostly today, but it is kind of an outlying case. Um, we said as well that in general this is really not an obvious thing to be working with in terms of marginal revenue, like the relationship from demand to marginal revenue is not, in general, an obvious relationship. Here it's, you know, marginal revenue is a third of demand for this particular demand function, but that's not anything special, that's just for what this one happened to be. The exception to that was linear demand. Linar demand's really nice, it's part of why we use, it's part of, not the only reason, but it's part of why we use it in our modelling a bit, it's because marginal revenue looks really nice, right? If you have linear demand, then you marginal revenue is the same way intercept twice as steep, which is relatively easy to work with. If you don't have linear demand, if you have weird looking demand, you can get all sorts, you can get really, really weird looking marginal revenues. It is entirely possible for demand to be continuous. And for marginal revenue to not be continuous, right, you can get jumps in marginal revenue if demand is, is not smooth, for example, so you can get weird things going on. We're gonna work with nice simple things, we're mostly gonna have linear demand, but keep in mind that it's not just the same way incept and twice as steep, it's, if demand's linear, then we can do some mathematics and get that um margin revenue is the same Y intercept but twice as steep. OK, any questions just on that sort of very brief recap of the last bit of last time. Lovely. Right, so moving forward, we can talk about supply, and we can talk about supply under this assumption, under this, as it says here, the price taking assumption, right, so we're talking when we're talking about competitive markets, so we think about competitive markets, one thing that we think of for competitive markets, Um, I would, I would say the, I would say for me at least, the main assumption for competitive markets is that price taking assumption. Firms come into the market, they see a market price, and they can sell as much as they, and they can sell exactly as much as they want at that market price. They sell as little as much or as much as they want. Uh, which means from the firm's perspective, the firm level demand, They, they see, you know, they're thinking about quantity at the firm level, so we use a small queue for firm level stuff, firm level quantity. They're thinking here and they're saying they see the market price, P star. And for them, demand is just that straight line at that Pty. That's that's the demand that they, they perceive. And so you get all your normal sort of statements like you can't sell at any price higher than PStar, because if you try and sell at a price higher than PStar, Because really demand is here. And then Here Right, if you try and sell at a price higher than PStar, no one buys from you because there's always other firms they could buy from instead at Price PayStar. Right, why would you buy using the using textbook example, why would you buy corn from a corn producer that sells it for $11 sorry, that sells it for $1 10s a kilo when you could just buy it from someone that sells it for $1 a kilo. You would just buy it from the $1 a kilo person. So you just can't sell more than PStar, and there's no reason you would ever choose to sell for less than PStar because you can. Do better, right, because you may as well sell it at the start, you can sell as much as you want at that higher price. So either but either way, sorry, firm level demand is just a straight line at this market price. And so one way that we might think about that is that we can think about this as firm level demand is perfectly elastic. Changes in changes in price cause infinitely large changes in quantity, because it either shoots quantity to zero or it shoots quantity to infinity if you try and reduce price a little bit. This is obviously never gonna be exactly true, right, because affirm, you know, even if you are a corn producer in the US if you try, I don't know how much corn's produced. Does anyone have any vague idea? US corn production 1000 tonnes a day seems vaguely plausible, or 1000 tonnes a day is produced by the industry as a whole, and each individual little corn producer is out there making their tonne a day. Um, if you then try and introduce into the market and try and sell 1000 tonnes in a day, obviously that's gonna have have impacts, so this is not gonna be strictly true, and even the, the 1 tonne a day people do have some impact, but we, you know, it's very, very small, we kind of just ignore it, um, we kind of just smooth it all out. So this is totally fine when we're talking about markets with lots of lots of relatively small firms making really very homogeneous goods, all stuff you've heard before. And I think something like corn production in the US is a good example of this, something like maybe sugar production in Queensland. If you've gone through North Queensland, there's just sugarcane, as far as the eye can see, right? Um, and there's each individual little farm makes, ah, makes 1000th of the total sugar cane production. And so in this kind of case where we're talking about these firms that are price taking, then, and as it says here, and only then, we can talk about supply functions for a firm. I'm saying it like this because it really annoys me when I read stuff and people are like, it's a monopoly and they have this supply curve. It's not true, right? Because the what a supply curve is, what a supply function is, is a thing that says when a firm faces a particular price, how much do they choose to sell? How much they choose to produce and sell in that market. Right, and so for a price taking firm, that's completely fine, because you walk in, you see the market price, right, your corn sells for $1 a tonne, you choose how much to make. It's $1 a kilo, you choose how much to make. That's totally fine. As soon as you talk about monopoly firms, this idea doesn't make sense at all because monopoly firms choose, have some, have at least some power to choose prices. So really it only works for price. Taking firms. In terms of what that firm level supply will look like, we talk about this being determined by profit maximisation. The firm wants to maximise profit, how does it do that? Given the maximise profit given the constraints it faces, how is it going to do that and, Hopefully if we're lucky, we'll be able to find that using some kind of supply function, some kind of function that says, simple function that says basing this price, how much they choose to make, and we are going to be lucky and we are gonna be able to do that, otherwise we wouldn't be talking about it. Questions, concerns? All clear. Lovely. Oh, here we have some stuff on price here. um, so profit, when we talk about profit. We've we've written this down before, um, profit is revenue minus costs, we can rearrange this a little bit and talk about it as quantity times what we might call, Average profit. I think I've said this before, but I just want to say it one more time, uh, on as a note on notation, we're always gonna use P for prices and we're gonna use i for profit, uh, only because once we've already used P for prices, we can't also use P for profit, right? We need, we need another symbol, and so we're gonna use i for profit. I know that's, I believe that's different than what say finance uses, but it's what we're going to work with and what economists always work with. Any questions, questions, concerns? Alright, let's try and figure out this supply curve, um, so we talk about firm level supply and we're try gonna try and get there from, from some graphs because we like graphs. So let's see what we can do. Right, we have some quantities that the firm's thinking of making, there's some dollars per unit because things are in terms of per unit dollars. Our firm has a demand function that they're facing. Oh, no. Our firm has a demand function that they're facing, make it a little bit lighter coloured. I won't, yes I will. Film has a demand function they're facing. The other things that we know about firms is we know that they have marginal costs. We know that they have average costs of production. Their demand is whatever the market price is, they can sell as much as they want at that price. They try and sell for a higher price, they can't sell anything. OK. And marginal cost goes through the bottom of average goes through the minimum average cost, as you would expect. To me, this throws up a few possible quantities that we can think about, look at. There's 5 of them here. 034. One of these is gonna be profit maximising, but which one? Hopefully we already all know, but I want to just sort of work through some process to emphasise a few things. Um, So let's talk about profit at each of these different levels, right, so we can talk about the profit if the firm makes Q0, the profit if they make Q1, the profit if they make Q2, the profit if they make Q3 and 4. So Q0, terrible idea, absolute garbage option, right? Q is really, really bad cos we can work out the profit level because we can do profit from these graphs. Profit is quantity times the difference between price and average cost. And so if we're making Q0 units. The price is always, is always peace, that's easy. This is the average cost. At Q 0 And so the profit for the firm is quantity times the gap between average cost and price, and so our profit is quantity, Q0, times the gap between average cost and price, which is this much, and so profit is, This region in here, but, but negatively this region in here, right, cause it's price minus average cost. And so profit's negative, right, this is, Maybe that's the best option we can get, maybe, but maybe we can do better than that. Certainly with this graph the way it is here, profit here is negative. I'm gonna get rid of this cos we need the same graph each time. Any questions, problems? Lovely. What about I want to get rid of. Less than 0. What about a queue one? Anyone, any takers for what profit is at que one? Less than 0, greater than 0, exactly 0, yep, yeah. 0, yeah, a few people said 0, yeah, profit is 0 because at Q1, if we go up and we look at average cost, average cost is here, this is the average cost. At Q1, and so we're making Q1 units. Our average profit for each unit we make is the gap between price and average cost, which is 0, and so Q times 0 is 0 regardless of what else is going on. But there's no profit here. At Q2, Q2 is where things start to become nice. At Q2 we have positive profit, yay. At Q2 we have our nice positive profit because our average cost is down here. Our price is still up here and so we have some nice positive profit. Isn't that nice? And so therefore this is profit maximising. Maybe, but I mean it's not, so don't, don't, don't say yes, um, maybe, but, but maybe not, right, because at Q3 we also have positive profit, right, because at Q3 we go up. And we go along The average cost and it's the gap between average cost and price and average cost, and so we're in this area here. The profit And from our graph, it's not clear which of these two regions is larger, right, maybe the blue region is larger because it has that bit of extra on the right, maybe the green region is larger because it has that bit of extra bit extra down the bottom. And I would say it's not obvious from the graph which of these two things is bigger, um, certainly we can, we can certainly say that they're both positive. But we don't just want to have positive profit, we want to have maximised profit, so we will have to go to a little to to a bit of additional, um, bit of additional argumentation to try to figure out which one's that is actually the best option. Uh, Q4 is again easy because Q4 is we're back to zero profit, right, Q4 is we're back to that world where, Where average cost and. Price are the same. For different reasons, right, ah sorry, Q1 had zero. Had zero profit because our fixed costs were so high that we hadn't made enough stuff to recover all of our fixed costs, um, or to properly recover our fixed costs, uh, in Q4, profit is profit is back is low again because we've made too much stuff, and we've started making all these things that were inefficient to create, to to to make. Uh, so that's the sort of the distinction. But in any case, both of them have zero profit. And so Q2 and Q3 seem like our, our best bets for the thing that maximises profit, and, but we need some sort of additional work to argue which one, Is gonna be the way to go. And Regrettably, we just can't really get there. With Just from looking at average cost. We're gonna need something a little bit more than that, um, in particular, well, yeah, and what we're gonna look at obviously is working at the margin, right, because marginalism is all the, all the thing that we're doing. And if we work at the margin, then it becomes reasonably quickly obvious that the thing that we want to produce at is Q3, right, because if we make if we think about making Q2. We get some sort of profit from making Q2. If we then talk about making an extra unit, right, so we go to make it a little tiny bit more than Q2, we end up with more profit, because our additional marginal profit is the money we make minus the cost, minus the marginal cost it costs to produce that. And if we make another one, we get, we get the profit and we lose the marginal cost of production and so on and so on and so on and so on and so on. And so what we end up with is Q3 is sort of our suspected best, and ultimately it is, it ultimately is the best because if you then think about making any more than Q3, then you're starting to lose money on each additional good that you're making. Right, because your marginal cost exceeds the price, right, so the extra good is not worthwhile, past Q3, but up to Q3 it is, all the usual stuff. And so Q3 was our best choice, and so the thing that we want to be doing, hopefully with zero surprise to everyone in the room, because you've all done micro one, is that when we profit maximise the way that our competitive market, the way that our price taking firm profit maximises is by looking, is by looking at the price, looking at the quantity, at the marginal cost of that quantity is equal to the price and producing at that quantity. Produce at Q So that The marginal cost of Q. Let's try and write that a bit better. Marginal cost of Q. Is equal to whatever the price happens to be. We knew this already, but then we've argued it a bit more. And that'll be the case where the profit is zero at this point, where the profit is positive, where the profit is negative, you're still gonna, with one exception, you're still gonna have this idea of produce at the quantity where marginal cost is equal to price. Mostly, we are gonna see a little caveat to that point in a second. Any questions, problems, concerns? Yes. The market price, the price that comes from the market, yeah. Which we haven't yet we will model but we haven't yet modelled. The wise question, and yeah, because we're a price taking firm, we just see PStar. So whatever PStar is, pick Q so that this is the case. OK. Lovely. We can also do this by the equations, right? Write out the equation, solve this thing, do all the work we've done, but fortunately we don't have to because we've already done all of our work and our work says that marginal cost is equal to marginal revenue, but we already know that marginal revenue is marginal revenue is the same as price. We can see that in a couple of ways, we can do it in the way that we've done it in micro one and just sort of argue for it, which is in a way that makes total sense. You can sell goods. As many goods as you want at that at that market price at the market price, whatever the market price is, and so if you want to sell one more good, right, what's the marginal revenue selling one more good, well you then sell one more good at the market price and so therefore your marginal revenue, your change in revenue is the extra is the price of the good that you sold, cos you just sold an extra good at that market price, and that was fine. So mar revenue marginal revenue is priced is fine from that direction. We can also argue it using some work we've just done if we don't want a hand wave at all, uh we can also argue it using the work we did before. On the pre uh at the end of last week, because if, Demand here is linear, that is a straight line, as we just argued. Well then, since demand is linear, marginal revenue is also linear with the same Y intercept but twice the slope. But if you double the slope of the straight line, it's still just, The same straight line, um, and so marginal revenue is also, The same line Which is to say marginal revenue equals price, this was at the market price, whatever that is. So either way, the supply curve, I should have reworded this and I should shouldn't have worded this quite this way. Either way, the firm supply curve looks like the same curve on the graph as the marginal cost curve. It's not exactly the same curve, sometimes we talk about this being the marginal cost being, you might talk about marginal cost as inverse supply curve, um, it's really because, and that's just a, a, a, a somewhat minor point, maybe, let's do it for a bit more space. Somewhat minor point is that, Marginal cost says at each quantity level, What is each quantity level Q0, what is the marginal cost of that quantity level, right, that's how marginal cost works, whereas the way the supply works is it says at this market price, What is the Supply At that price. Right, so one is quantity to price, quantity to dollars per unit, one is do per unit to quantity, uh, it just so happens that the relationship looks the same, right, and so if we draw all the line, all the points that are marginal cost. We're also because because the way we choose supply is we choose supply so that it sort of matches marginal cost, uh we get the same curve, Almost for supply, but the direction of the logic is a bit is, is reversed. Yeah, I for one, but emphasise. Yeah. Yeah Yes, the question was why is there that little divot in the in the marginal cost, um, we, You probably did in micro one, but it's not necessarily emphasised, um, the rationale for the little, the little divot at the bottom of the marginal cost, it's, it's the way these things are often drawn. Um, it's not necessary that there is one, there is a little divot here. If you use an equation for marginal cost or for for costs or for production functions generally, you usually won't see the little divot, but if you go to real world data, it kind of looks like there is. The little divot here is that it comes from the idea that for the, As you increase production right at the start of your production, when you, when you're going from very, very, very small to just very small levels of production, um, you're able to specialise your workforce, you're able to get gains from scale, as you go from very, very, very small to just small, which is sort of going from, From like This much production to this much production, um, and so therefore your costs of production are falling, right, each additional unit is cheaper and cheaper to make, and then you hit some sort of level at which that ceases to be the case, um, and then when you and then as you start to increase from there, you see marginal costs start to go up. So it's really just a, uh, uh, if you look at real world data, often it has this kind of flavour, this little divot at the bottom. But it's not necessary, not it's not strictly necessary, it doesn't happen for all firms or for all production. But it's common, so we put it in. Yes, so the question was, is if we able to can we prove from the graph that P equals MC is profit maximising? Hopefully, I mean that was in some sense that was kind of what we were trying to do, trying to argue here, um, but I can go through it more directly just just from here, which is, look, we see if we see Par as our, as our price, we're stuck with that. We need to choose profit, as I say, as you say, profit maximising level, we can look at marginal profit of each good that's produced. So the marginal profit for each good that's produced is price is is marginal revenue minus marginal cost, gives you marginal profit, yes, good good good. And so we can say, well, to produce, you know, we, we, we start at Q0, let's let's look from Q0 and and and work around from there. Um, QN's not profit maximising because if we make one more unit, we can do better, because if you make one more unit, our marginal profit's positive. That one more unit we're even making 20 plus 1 units, that's still not profit maximising, because look, if we make one more unit, we still have positive marginal profit. And make more and more unit positive marginal profit, positive profit da da da da da, until we get to that. Price equals marginal, uh, until we get, yeah, price equals marginal cost. And if we then tried to make more units after that. Marginal cost exceeds marginal revenue. Which means we would be losing money by making and selling that good. Um, so profit would go down. Uh, and so we, we make, you know, we make, make, um, amounts up to there, but we don't make more than that. If you want to do it a bit if you wanna do it somewhat more formally, because marginal cost is not straight here, you have to talk about, like the the inter rule like the interval of the space between um marginal cost and, Price and you maximise that in you choose Q to maximise that integral, maximise that area, and that's at, at what I call here SAP style. At price with marginal cost. Good. It's good if your profit is positive. It's not good if you're producing where marginal profit is positive. Because if you're reducing where marginal profit is positive, that means you it's it's, sorry, I shouldn't say that. It's fine if marginal profit is positive, but it's probab but it's definitely not the best if marginal profit is positive. Because if your marginal profit is positive, that means by making an extra unit your profit goes up. Uh, so we don't, we don't, it is a weird one in that. The firm wants to produce where marginal profit is zero, because where marginal profit is zero maximises their profit. Which is a little strange, I do get that. It comes to this idea of if we look at quantity and we look at profit, Here, which is unusual, but we're just trying to emphasise something, because profit can be negative. We have this kind of shape. Generally speaking, to profit. There's actually dollars in this kind of shape for our profit curve in general. So for very small numbers we might get negative profit. But if marginal as you say, if marginal profit is positive, or if we're making it Q0 marginal profit is positive, we could have done better, it's fine, but we could do better, what we want. Is is this level? I'll call it QA just for this argument here. What we want is to produce a Q star because at Qar profit's maximised clearly from the graph, and also marginal profit zero, again from the graph because the curve is flat. It's a little bit of a sight, but it's not too bad. Very good. Any other questions here, problems, concerns? Lovely. OK, so we set, we more or less, we will make a caveat to this, but basically supply is marginal cost. So, if prices are low, it could be the case that even if your profit maximising, nevertheless profit is negative, but that the best you could possibly do still gets you stuck with negative profit. And I could draw a graph for this, and I, we will, but like the story for this makes sense, right? You own a bakery, um, but you owe money on the loan that you used to buy the bakery and your loan is $5000 a month. You're paying that regardless. You can open this month. And if you open this month then labour and inputs are 6 will cost you $6000 for your for your workers and stuff, and you would make $63,000 in revenue. What should you do? Who reckons we open, open for month. One person opens, who reckons we close for the month? Who has 11 person ran is closed month, who doesn't know. Sure, OK, that's alright. Um, I think I'm, I'm hoping, I hope at least, well you, you argue we're open, why, why do you think we should open for the month.

SPEAKER 2
Yeah marginal revenue 6.3.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah, exactly, right, if the 5K's gone, it's done, right, your question is, is it worth going opening, is it worth opening? The cost of opening is an extra $6000 the benefit of opening is an extra $63,000 you make from revenue. And so you want to open the bakery. It's, it's worthwhile for you to open the bakery because you, you still lose money for the month. But if you don't open, you lose $5000 because you have to pay that $5000 a month in rent. Uh, sorry, in, in, in money on the loan, but if you do open, you only lose $4.7,000 right, because you lose your $5000 for opening for for for existing, you lose your, sorry, you lose your $5000 in rent, you lose your $6000 in inputs, but you make back $6.3,000 in revenue. And so it's worth being open, right, even though you're running at a loss. There's benefit here to being open compared to staying closed. In the long run you can't do this, but like, if you were a bakery in Canberra in like, this is for a month, so let's say, let's call it like, Yeah, if you're a bakery in Canberra in January, this might be what your January looks like. Right, who here has been in Canberra in January? Lots of you, is it real, real quiet? It's real, real quiet. This might be a bakery in January, and so you might be like, oh we're gonna lose money this month, we're gonna lose a lot of money this month, but whatever, we'll stay open and it's fine. Right, we'll say it's fine and we'll make the money back later. If that was gonna be every month, then you might have to close in the long run.

SPEAKER 2
Yep. If the cost for opening at 6 revenue is not 6.3, are we?

SPEAKER 1
In the case of indifference, we always, Tiebreak in the direction of opening, um, so in the case of it as a, as a very, very general modelling rule, in the case of indifference, we tiebreak in the direction of doing the thing, whatever that, whatever the thing is, so we buy the good in indifference, we open the firm, we, we do all that kind of stuff, yeah. And that actually will be very important, so yes, we tie back in the direction of opening. Uh, is there a case In lots of cases we're indifferent between staying open and closing, staying open and closing and doing something else instead, yeah, we'll see it a lot in our long run equilibrium. Um, so what we're talking about here, just to, just to put up a little graph for this, what we're talking about here is that we have our marginal costs, we have our average costs. And the issue is that our prices are so low that, We're losing money. Right, our best, our best amount of production is down here, actually call this. Supply for PStar, our best amount of production is here because we produce according to marginal cost, that profit maximises, but we're still losing money. We still have negative profit. But it's sort of OK, it's still worth opening at least. OK Question otherwise? Yeah. So what about very low prices, right, so this is the issue of we own our bakery, we owe the $5000 a month, we can open this month, labour input to $6000 but if we do, we would only make now $5.3,000 in revenue. And so the question is what should we do? And here, this is the this is the other side of this which is we should close. Right, is that there's no point even opening it all. Right, we, yeah, we get some revenue from opening, but we've got to pay for our workers, we've got to pay for our lights to be on, we've got to pay the other inputs to to be running this thing, and so the better option is just to close, right? And so the as an example of this, or a potential example for this, um, although it's a little bit iffy here, but we'll run with it, um, the small Vietnamese place in Lyneham shops, it closes in January. It's just not there's a in if you go around to the little little local shops around Canberra. occasionally see that the the this this shops a sign in the window saying we're closed from December 24th until January 28th or whatever. Right, they're just, they're closed for a few weeks. Partly that's they want to go on holiday, but partly it's, it's this kind of issue, right, it's that opening gets them revenue, but the costs of opening are just higher than that. And so you're better off just closing. So what should we do? Um, profit is less negative if we produce nothing. Right, it's better to just close, have Q equals 0, produce nothing and and walk away. For this month, right, that to shut down immediately. And so if we go to our graph here, go to our graphs because we like our graphs, quantity, dollars per unit. Marginal cost, oh, what happened there, marginal cost. Average cost, this is a little bit hard for us to make a nice clean argument for, you can, but we don't quite have the machinery to do the do the nice clean argument because we haven't made a good, we haven't we haven't bothered making that big like marginal average variable cost versus average total cost distinction, um, but certainly there's gonna be some price that's sufficiently low, right, very low. Where the better option where if we chose to make Q, or if we chose to make this level here, call this QL, if we chose to make this, then we would make negative profit. And we'd make all this negative profit. But we can do better than that, right, that's our minus 5700 that we get from opening and producing the optimum quantity. We can do better than that just by closing completely. And so while we could make what we just had up there as QL, we can do better by making 0 units, so there's some cut-off point, call it here. There's some cut-off, shutdown level of prices. Where below that the thing to do is actually to make no units, I'll come to the question in a second, where the thing to do is actually to make no units. And so for our supply curve, our supply curve really is, everything's fine, it follows marginal cost. But then, if price were to go any lower than that, The best thing to do is to produce nothing. So if we're a bit more careful with supply, it's not quite exactly supply across marginal cost, it's supply equals marginal cost in most cases, but if prices are really, really low, we just, we just say nah, we're out, we, we're better off just closing and we set pretty stereo units, yeah. For For the purpose of this model, all we seem

SPEAKER 2
to care about is whether variable costs exceed revenue or vice versa, the actual value. On the loan relevant, like could that be 50K on it wouldn't affect.

SPEAKER 1
Yes. Yeah, yeah, the size of the, the size of the loan. Does not affect the shutdown price, it doesn't affect how much you choose to produce, uh, yeah, it doesn't affect the amount you choose to produce, it will affect your, Whether you're running out of profit or loss perhaps obviously, um, and so for the in terms of long run effects it will definitely have an effect, but in terms of what you're doing today, it doesn't matter whether you whether your loan interest is 5K a month or 50K a month because you're paying it anyway, it's a sunk cost or you can't do anything about it. We're treating here the loan is a fixed cost, yeah, the loan payments are the are the fixed cost for the month, so it's a, yeah, it's a fixed cost variable cost problem. You, you still set price it was marginal, you still set, you still set, you still produce in the, in the usual sense of, you see a price you produce, The supply you produce at that price is the marginal cost, it is so that the marginal cost, At the level you produce. You still set price equal marginal cost, but I want to say that more carefully, which is you still choose the level of production such that at that level of production, the marginal cost of that level of production is the same as the price. Complicated way of saying it, but like. Marginally more accurate way. Yeah, supply is not quite just marginal cost, marginal cost, lost this, this video, yep. Ah, the long run, the long run is. Coming up pretty soon. So we will get there, we're not quite there just yet. OK. Lovely, so all this stuff was at the firm level and that's all fine, right, so we had our firm level and, So we talk about firm level analysis which we've just been doing, we have marginal cost, we have some average costs. Marginal cost is also the firm level supply, but often what we care about is we care about the market, it may surprise you to learn. Right, we care about the market level stuff. And so at the market there's there's some other things that go on, right, the market we have to worry, we, we, well sorry, first off we're talking about market level supply, each individual firm is out here producing supply, which is more or less just marginal cost with that little caveat. With that little caveat that it. You know, 0 if price is really, really low, but we're not gonna worry about it, we're just, you know, there is that caveat over there. Um, and so at each different price level, each firm is choosing to produce at each price level, P. Our firm, I'm not gonna use, I'm gonna be try and be careful and use lowercase s now for the firm level supply, our firm is producing SAP, the amount that the firm is choosing to produce. But there's lots of firms, right, again, we're talking about the corn market in the US, we're talking about there being 1000 firms all making corn. All the firms are the same because we're assuming that all of our firms are gonna be the same. So all of our firms have the same costs, they have the same, they have the same margin, they have the same cost structure because they have the same production function. Um, which means they all have the same marginal costs, which means they all choose the same outcome, the same production outcome, given the same prices. So all of our firms are all the same, they're all producing SFP, and there's lots of them, and so at price P, the market level of production, Is gonna be based on the amount that each firm is producing, But then we times it by the number of firms. Right, because each individual firm makes SAP. Makes the amount they produce, it's N firms, we're gonna use N as our symbol for number of firms, it's N firms and so this is gonna be our market level of production in our, in our big market world. Couple of things to just point at here, I've used lowercase q for each individual firm, and so this might be, tonnes At the market level, I've used capital Q because this might be, Thousands of tonnes. Or or whatever it is, right, the scale here is very different. If you put these on the same kind of graph, you would not be talking, you know, we're always gonna have the market level supply looks a lot like the firm level supply in terms of how it, you know, looks, but really it it's, it's phenomenally flatter because the the scale is just radically different. And you do that for every price and so every time you're just multiplying by the same N because there's always N firms, and so your market level supply, Looks broadly the same. As your firm level supply, um. And that's it, right, and if the price is sufficiently low, the firms don't produce. This is our market level supply, which is number of firms. Times the marginal cost for each individual firm. It depends on depends on depends on, I shouldn't say equals, I should say depends on, is a function of supply is a function of the number of firms. And the cost structure of each individual firm. Questions turns. Problems. Lovely. We can very nearly there, right, I'm actually gonna I'm actually gonna grab this cos I can just use this again, we can now do. We can now finally, now that we're in now that we're in the end of week 9 of your 2nd year of economics. Come on. Why can't I click this? Good. Now that we're in the end of our 2nd year. End of week 9 of your 2nd year of economics, we can talk about price formation and demand and supply curves. Yay, which we also did in week 3 I guess of the first year, but like we, we got there as well. Um, and so when we talk about this, we're gonna say we're gonna get rid of that price line cos that's not relevant to our discussion. We've worked out the supply curve for our, for our market for our for our firm level, we've worked out the supply curve for our market level, we know that there's some kind of demand for goods. At the market level, we discussed demand for goods to some extent at least, sometimes demand for goods at the market level. And so when we talk about the short-run market equilibrium, we worry about the short-run market clearing condition. So the short-run equilibrium is going to be determined by the fact that the market clears, and so we find the price, Par As our market clearing price is the unique price where the quantity demanded at that price is also equal to the quantity supplied. At that price, supplied by the market as a whole, at that price. Isn't that lovely? Yay, that's our that's gonna be our market, our short run equilibrium, our price, and I wanna make this, Not be the same there. And so each individual firm is seeing that short-run equilibrium price, is choosing to produce where price equals marginal cost. So this is our supply for each individual firm, I'm gonna call this little Q star. It's our profit maximising level of production for each individual firm. Each firm is making Q star and so the market as a whole is making end times. QStar, where N is the number of firms in the market. And this industry, this market is in short run equilibrium. I think it's notable here that this, this market is not in long run equilibrium for reasons we'll talk about in a second, but this is a fine market in short run equilibrium, right, because short run equilibrium is defined by, as it has still on the board a little bit there, the short run market clearing condition, which is quantity demanded equals quantity, the price is determined, so that quantity demanded equals quantity supplied and we're fine, right, market clearing, market clears, everything's OK. Questions, questions, problems, concerns. Cool, nice. When we talk about these competitive markets, we've done this before, I just want to emphasise this, when we talk about changes in demand, changes in demand are gonna be due to income changes, preference changes, price of other good changes, the stuff we talked about in weeks 1 and 2 principally. Um, Supply changes are gonna be changing only due to a couple of small things, marginal costs. Right, because marginal cost was important, right, the production technology, the input costs, um, I should have had in here, I guess in principle number affirms. Although we in general assume that number of firms is fixed in the short run, but you could do a shock that is half of the firms are forced to close for whatever reason, right, that that could be in principle a shock that you do. Um, and in very specific circumstances changes to fixed costs could in principle have an effect, right, because of the issue we, I think we talked about earlier, um, because of the issue we talked about earlier, because that supply curve does have, Does have that jump. When prices are very low, if you, oh no, actually I lie, insure and that won't have an effect for the thing we just talked about, right, so generally speaking, this is, this is just not gonna be an issue. I'm not even, not even gonna worry about that, um, because it's gonna be so specific that it doesn't, doesn't really matter. Changes in marginal costs is your issue. Let's get rid of that. And these will change short run equilibrium to a different short run equilibrium. We will introduce this, let's uh let's talk about these things and then, then we'll have a quick break. Um, what we've talked about so far are what we call competitive markets, right? Competitive markets, firms and consumers are both price taking, um, we get all of our results from micro one that we will discuss a bit more here, but we get our results from micro one like total surplus being maximised in the short run, and for competitive markets, we really only talk about short run effects. Right, that's the thing that's interesting, that's the thing that we worry about for for competitive markets. Perfectly competitive markets are a different kind of beast, right, you can talk about competitive markets and they're great, and you can talk about perfectly competitive markets and they're again, a different thing, right, there's an there's additional long run assumptions when we start talking about perfectly competitive markets, notably we're assuming that notably we talk about the the long run effects being free entry and exit. So perfectly competitive markets have these extra cloud of assumptions behind them, which is, uh, that there's one of which is there's all these potential firms that are waiting, sitting in the wings, Of people thinking, oh, I'm, I could enter this market, if it becomes profitable, then I will like extraordinarily profitable, then I will enter into this market, and there's all these firms out there waiting to do that, um, that's a requirement for perfectly competitive market, for the perfectly competitive market model. Um, another component of this is that there's, there's exit in this in the long run, right, that firms can just can leave the market. If they're not profitable, they don't expect to be profitable in the long run, then they can, they can leave. But these are additional assumptions on top of competitive markets, right, that firms leave if they're not profitable, and that there is a cloud of potential firms that could enter if the world becomes profitable. And in that setting, then we start talking about long run because we get entry and exit, and we start talking about both total surplus being maximised in the long run and also average cost of production being minimised, as as we will see. Questions, concerns The other additional thing that's maybe you did in micro one but maybe you didn't, is external economies of scale. So I wanna make this again, this distinction, economies of scale is something that we talk about about individual firms, right, firms economies of scale is as you change production levels, do the costs, so do average costs go up or down? It's it's broadly what it is, it's not exactly that, but it's it's, it's pretty much that, right? As you change in it's it's really as you change inputs, you know, if you double inputs, do you more or less than double outputs. But that translates pretty quickly into if you um if you double your desired production level. Do costs double, or do they less than double? Right, how do, how do costs change? That's all about an internal firm thing, right, as as firms get bigger, do they get more efficient or less efficient? Is economies of scale. External economies of scale is talking about changes in cost functions when the size of the industry changes. So it's nothing about an individual firm, it's saying if lots and lots of new firms enter the market. Do my costs change? Not just the price I see or anything like that, cos that that will have an effect obviously, but as more firms into the market, do my costs change? So you might have something, you can have positive external economies of scale, right, in, in a certain sense, the existence of, if you look historically, and this is, I'm not an economic historian, so I apologise to any budding economic historians in the room, but broadly speaking, positive external economies of scale is a potential argument for why cities exist in the first place, if you go historically, right? Because people come together and it's not that it, it's not that, you know, and so, and sorry, and because all these people are coming together, um, my costs become cheaper because there's lots of other people around near me and my industry gets bigger, and because my industry is bigger, my costs become cheaper because there's lots of other people, right? I'm not the only person buying lumber, there's 100, there's a 100 other firms. Also buying lumber and so the lumber producer is able to become very efficient and so lumber becomes cheaper and now it's cheaper for me to do my construction because there's all these other people also doing construction, and so the construction process is much faster. Right, so knowledge spillovers are your standard example here. You can talk about negative external economies of scale, right, as more firms into the industry, it becomes more costly for each individual firm. Um, the, uh, the big version of this is increased price of inputs. Uh, so, solar panels are the standard go to example for this. It's a little bit tricky because solar panel prices have come down over time. Um, but if you go back to sort of the mid 2000s, and you talk about solar panel costs, solar panels were produced almost exclusively from e-waste, right? In the mid-2000s, basically all the solar panels that were out there were basically being produced from silicon that was stripped from old computers. Right, computers got old, they got recycled, they got turned into solar panels. And that was fine, right, so the inputs were very cheap, the technology wasn't very good and so they were still moderately expensive, but the inputs were super cheap because it was just recycled computer parts. That's not true anymore, right, the industry is now so much bigger that there's no longer that you have to you have to go to new mining ventures in order to get the resources to build the solar panels. Um, and so the price of these things is that the price of the inputs has therefore gone up significantly because the industry's gotten bigger, right, when there was one firm making solar panels, it was fine, the inputs were cheap. Now that there's 1000 firms making solar panels, the inputs are more expensive. Um, and so it's not just a firm got bigger, it's there's more firms. We get negative external economies of scale, um. Unhelpfully, given my first example, construction suffers a lot from negative external economies of scale. Um, if you talk about macro stuff, I know there's an election currently which talks about some of these things, so that's why I'm bringing it up now as well. Um, we talk about construction costs, it's tricky for governments to just go in and spend lots of money on construction, because if the government spends more money on construction, there's more construction happening, there's more firms producing construction. Then the input prices start to go up because construction workers are able to charge are able to charge a premium on their work because there's more demand for their goods, um, and so that each individual unit of construction becomes like being a construction firm potentially becomes more expensive in that sense, so there is potentially negative external economies of scale. And the example that we've worked with before is neutral, economies of scale, right, more firms doesn't matter, which in a lot of cases is gonna be fine, right? If you're opening, thinking about opening a new bakery in Canberra, it does not matter how many other bakeries there are. Your costs, their costs don't change because you open a bakery. If you open 100 new bakeries in Canberra, your costs do not change just because there's 100 new bakeries. You might become less profitable because you have to drive down prices and increase competition. Your costs don't, your costs as a baker don't change because there's now 100 new ones in Canberra. OK, I said a lot just then. Questions, questions, concerns. External economies of scale. Fantastic. We will take a break here and then we'll talk about long run equilibrium after the break, so it's 59, so we'll start up again at 50. Thanks. If you have any questions, you can come see me now. Thanks.

SPEAKER 0
Is it OK if I just.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah, that's fine. Um, that's fine, let the person know that. Tran.

SPEAKER 3
Yeah, is lost If you, so they, they, they wouldn't

SPEAKER 1
normally, but if you, if you tell them it's, that's fine.

SPEAKER 3
I Actually measure things like. So I think before we had that example with like the shopping. Um, so, uh, just yesterday I had a question about, um. How you can measure it must just using a bunching. Um, but That uh you know. OK, so but um. But the idea is like if there's a threshold where it's beneficial to be on one side of the threshold, then the other side. Um, people would want to move from the bad side to the good side, that's a measure of elasticity. How easily Yeah How much you Yeah doesn't I think the idea works for some. Yes, it does work. How do you actually measure it after. Are they different There are different The Mm. Um, you can charge and you can say people will

SPEAKER 1
see a price of.

SPEAKER 3
$5.06 dollars.

SPEAKER 1
What. people the one. But price discrimination.

SPEAKER 3
I Um, because you, because you're still you're showing some

SPEAKER 1
people a $5 price.

SPEAKER 3
That sounds a little unethical to me.

SPEAKER 1
I, I agree.

SPEAKER 3
Uh. we have.

SPEAKER 1
Good thanks. Alright, welcome back everyone. So, we've done all of our work now and we can finally now talk about long run equilibrium, which was the question that was asked earlier. Um, and so we're gonna assume neutral external economies of scale just to keep our lives a little bit easier, um, and we're gonna look for long run equilibrium in our perfectly competitive market. So we're gonna need to have a, we're gonna need two things, we don't need to be in short run equilibrium, right, we still need the market to clear. But on top of that, we need that no, no, we, because we now have this additional assumption that there's free entry and exit, if we're gonna be in an equilibrium, we want to be in a situation where there's no firms that want to enter, and there's no firms that want to exit, right, so there's no entry and exit. That no entry and exit condition is gonna be our zero profit condition where it's important for our, our thought processes to recall that zero profit is normal economic profit. Right, zero profit doesn't literally mean that your accounting profit says $0 it says that you're receiving your normal economic profit, which might be your 7% return on your investment, is zero profit. This is this idea of we're in a perfectly competitive market, we're making furniture, there's a bunch of other capitalists in the background, and if they can invest in furniture making and make a 7.5% return, then they will, and the existing furniture companies are all owned by the capitalists, and if they're only. Making a 6.5% return, then they'll pull the money out of furniture production and put it into something else instead, but that does make a 7% return. It does make that normal return that you kind of are getting in most places in the economy. Right, so that that's the idea that we're having here, right, it's, it's zero profit is normal economic profit. It's not literally a counting line, it says 0. Which is why firms are happy to keep producing at zero profit, right, that's that's I think might might have been part of your question earlier. Firms are happy to exist at zero profit because zero profit's normal profit, it's just 7% return. It's not great, you're not making loads and loads of money, but you're making the money and money that you expect to make given the amount of work that you're putting in is what zero profit is, so. We're all fine, all fine. Lovely. Um, so we need, we need market clearing, so quantity supplied equals quantity demanded, and we need zero profit. And so we, in terms of drawing this thing, it's a matter of being just careful, I guess. We have our firm level. And our market level We're gonna need to draw our we're going to make sure that demand and supply are such that the market clears and market clearing to establish a price, and we want the price to be such that the firm makes zero profit. few different ways of drawing this, I normally find it easiest to draw the firm first and say the firm has some marginal costs, the firm has some average costs of production. And so if we want the firm to be making zero profit, given that they're profit maximising, there's only one price that does that for us, right, because if the price is down here somewhere, PL the best they could do would be to produce this much. And then they make negative profit, right, so that's not gonna be a long run equilibrium. If the price is up here. Right, then the best they can do is is to produce this much, and they're making positive profit and so we're not going to be in long run equilibrium. And so we talk about as the as the price that it's gonna have to be, is our price is gonna have to be here. Of course, I'll call it PStar, it's usually called PStar. Our price is gonna have to be a PStar. Whatever else is going on, price is gonna have to be PStar because that's the price that's gonna mean that when the firm is maximising profit, they're making zero profit. And so if we want that to be Par, our market should have, Demand And supply So our market makes. QStar units. And QStar is. In times little Q star. Where N is the number of firms in our industry. You know I'm not. And so what's happening here, all the things we expect to happen, right, the market's clearing, profit is zero. So there's no reason why anything would have to change. Which is what an equilibrium is. Long run equilibrium, everything's lovely, everything's good, everything's fine. We'll add a few caveats around this, though it's not not not nothing really major, this is a short run supply curve, right, so this is our supply curve which depends on number of firms and marginal cost of each individual firm. We can also talk about, we can also, and we will talk about a long run supply curve, uh, which is not going to depend on the number of firms, because in the long run number of firms can change. We'll talk about that in a second. emphasising this is our short run supply curve. Any questions, questions, concerns? Yes.

SPEAKER 2
Just to clarify in the short run.

SPEAKER 1
Number of firms are fixed in the short run, yeah. So the, the thing that can change in the long run, uh, I mean capital costs and that kind of thing, but we kind of are pushing that aside a little bit, but number of firms, changes in the long run for us here. Because again there's that cloud of potential firms in the background that might enter if profit's extraordinarily high, and obviously existing firms will leave, if profits if profit is less than normal, less than less than zero. Yeah the questions. Lovely, um, now, this neutral external economies of scale doesn't seem to have done much work yet, um, and so we probably should see if it, you know, we should see what that is doing and what difference that does. Make Grab that for later. And so the way that makes a difference is what happens as say demand changes, as the size of the market changes. And so we can talk about what happens, we'll do a a a demand increase cause that's the easiest one to do, right, so if the demand was to if for example demand were to increase, Due to some reason. Number of consumers goes up or number of, Or people just like this good more or or for whatever reason, demand for this good increases. We have short run effects, and we have long-run effects. And this is where this is where our neutral economy, external economies scale is gonna start to have have some bite. And in the short run, we're fine, right? In the short run we get to a new short run equilibrium, the way we always, always have, and we get, this is very familiar, yeah, and we get, and we're gonna produce Q1, which is D1. Ah And our industry is going to produce DQ1. Why is that? It's because each individual firm, Is gonna produce more goods. Each individual firm is gonna produce more goods, each individual firm's gonna produce Q1. Um, because they see this price P1, which is our market clearing price. Each individual firm is making positive profit. I want to be careful with my positive profit here because I've seen, Unbelievably many students, I would say probably most students, if they are drawing positive profit on a graph like this in their exams, draw it incorrectly, and so I'm hesitant to even draw this, but I wanna just be clear that the thing I'm about to do is wrong. Right, because I think actually probably most students will then draw in profit as this amount here. And be like negative profit. And that's incorrect, which is why the word wrong is written across the top of the screen. Can anyone tell me what's wrong with this, why this isn't profit, or, or if this isn't, what is the, what is the correct drawing of profit on this curve on this graph here. I'm very glad I did this then. So at that, so yeah, so at P1, if the price has gone up to P1, we're choosing to produce Q1 because that's profit maximising and then this big green box is indicated as profit. Yep. Exactly right, because this, this old PSA is not relevant in any way, right, the firm doesn't see this or care about this. It it's the minimum average cost, I suppose, but it's otherwise it's kind of not an important thing. We've talked about profit a lot, let's now get rid of the wrong answer, good. Um, Because we've talked about profit, profit, one of the ways we think about profit is profit is quantity times average profit, price minus average cost. Right, and so we're making Q1 units, we're charging price P1, the average cost of production for Q1 units is is this much. And so our profit is gonna be. Here, right? Because it's Quantity times average profit, it's not quantity times some other random amount. I mean, either way, profit's positive, I just want to be clear, right, it's it's, it's this positive. Different amount of positive, not more than this. Any questions, questions, concerns? Cool, this is our short run equilibrium following the demand shock, everything's fine. But then there's then there's long run effects, right, and the long run effect is firms enter the market. I should say, I should actually put here as well, this is N times. Q1, right, initial number of firms. But each firm's making more stuff. In the long run though, we have entry and exit of firms, firms entered the market, right, our capitalists who are looking at this market go, oh, this isn't making 7% profit anymore, this is 7% return anymore, this is now making a 9% return. I'm going to open a new furniture factory to make furniture, right, and make a 9% return because furniture is so expensive now, it's it's the new hot thing to buy. And so I opened a new factory, and so the number of firms increases. Right, as the number of firms increases, the short run supply curve, short run industry supply curve shifts, right, the number of firms changes. And so our short run supply, which depends on marginal costs and number of firms, that's gonna change. The costs for each individual firm aren't changing because for each individual firm, because, and this is where our neutral external economies of scale comes in, because we have neutral external economies of scale, as more firms enter, the costs for each firm do not change. This is our easy it is our easy version of this, our easy part of this problem. So none of that change, none of the none of the firm level stuff changes, the cost curves don't change, right, because each firm stays, each firm looks the same, there's just more of them now. But because there's more of them, if each firm, you know, if before there were 1000 firms, each making 1 tonne a month or 1 tonne a day, and now there's 1100 firms each making 1 tonne a day, well then there's more stuff being made. Um, and so our supply curve also shifts. Outwards, in principle you can think of it as pivoting, but it really doesn't matter, uh, so a supply curve also shifts outwards. To some degree, to a new short run supply curve. We can think about various sizes of this shift, right, if there's a little shift, we're gonna, I'm not gonna do this too much, but if there's a little shift, That's fine, right, and, and like between today and tomorrow that might be between, you know, this month and next month, that might be the size of the shift, but there's still positive profit being made in that case, right, because the market would clear at this price. Which means the marginal cost exceeds the average cost at the profit maximising level and so the firm is still making profit and so more firms will enter, and the supply curve supply curve will shift further, and so we can think about the supply curve shifting further and further. To the right until profit is pushed back down to zero, back down to that 7% normal rate of return. Um, and so our supply curve's gonna get shifted, get pushed more and more to the right. More and more to the world until. We're over here, supply in the short run with the eventual number of firms. Because once supply gets pushed to there, then we're back in our long run equilibrium. There's no longer any need for change. supply shifted by less than this, then there's still positive profit, and so more firms will enter and supply curve will shift further to the right, and so that'll keep happening until we get to this supply curve where the market clears at that initial market price, at price equals minimum average average cost. And so each firm still makes PS units, this is also the, the after the fact, this is the after the fact quantity, each firm is making Q2, sorry, each firm is making Q2 units, um. And so, sorry, Q2 units, which is also Qar units, and so the difference is, Our Q2 here. Is that there's more firms. Each firm is making the same thing that they were before, but there's more firms out there. So from each individual firmness perspective, the increase in demand really doesn't make much difference. And so this broad argument here is why it is an argument for why we can say things like restaurants in Canberra make a pretty similar rate of return to restaurants in Sydney. Why? Because Sydney has massively higher demand for restaurants than Canberra does, right, because it has 15 times population, 12 times population, it's a lot bigger, and so the demand is massively higher. But it's not that each individual firm is different, it's just that there's a lot more firms. So each individual firm kind of looks the same, but there's a there's, you know, 12 times as many firms in Sydney than in Canberra. But they're all making the same kind of profit levels. Um, because profit gets pushed back to zero. Questions Concerns issues here. OK. So part of what we've said there, and I'm gonna need to get rid of, do I have another slide for this? No, maybe down here, no. Yeah. Need more space and nowhere gives me enough space for this, oh dear, um, part of, What we've been saying here then is that regardless of how big that demand shift is, the supply, the number of firms are always gonna change such that the price gets pulled back down to that, um, to that minimum average total cost, that, that Par level, which is our minimum average cost. And so on top of our short-run supply curve, which is upward sloping in the usual way and has a fixed number of firms, we can talk about our long-run supply curve, which is what our, what supply is gonna look like in the long run as number of firms change, um, and so the argument we've made here, and I, I'm gonna just redraw them because I think it's gonna be more useful. The argument that we want to make is that our long-run supply is actually for our, again, for our neutral external economies of scale, long-run supply is gonna be, it's gonna be horizontal, right, it doesn't really matter what the demand looks like in the long run. We're gonna end up with the price being the minimum average cost. Because if the price was anything other than minimum average cost, firms are going to enter and leave the market until the price gets pushed back to that minimum average cost. The example we've done is when demand increases, and firms enteror, but you can think about demand decreasing, profits being negative, firms leaving, and firms will leave until there's a, there's a few enough firms, there's little enough competition, the price gets pushed back up to that, that minimum average cost. The profit gets pushed back up to zero. So long run supply is is flat here. So there's a lot of mechanics behind all of this. Right, because there's all this mechanics behind it, but ultimately what we're, you know, we're thinking about supply in the long run, or supply look like, well, if there's neutral external economies of scale, long run supply is just nice and flat. More demand just results in the long run in more firms, not in higher or lower prices. Questions. Questions, concerns, problems. All good? OK. It's the easy case, so we want to be on board with this before we do the hard case. All good? All right. We're gonna do the same thing. But with Negative. External economies of scale. So again, negative external economies of scale is as more firms enter, it becomes more expensive for each individual firm. The costs for each individual firm go up. So we're thinking here about more firms enter, there's only a fixed pool of acceptable workers in this industry, and so as more firms enter, you have to pay those those workers more. Or so the input costs, so possibly 11 argument for a negative external scale could be input costs increase. Right, because there's more competition for at at that level, at the input cost level. So we have the same kind of shock. We have a demand shock. We have all the same short run effects. For all the same reasons. All the same as before. Short runs the same, short run effects are the same. No, no differences. There's gonna be differences in the long run effects. Because there's positive profit here, as discussed previously, there's positive profit here, quantity times average profits positive, it's profit, which drives firm entry. That ferment tree is gonna push supply, the the shore on supply to the to the right, right, because firms are because there's more firms entering the market. Same as before. But there's an additional effect. Which is that as firms enter the market, the costs of production increase, right, our marginal costs get pushed up. And so we have two simultaneous effects happening. We have some firms enter the market. But also marginal costs. And average costs because costs, marginal costs feed into average costs also costs increase. And this is where it gets really, really messy very quickly um and so we have that costs are also going up, marginal costs, is blue somewhat different than black? Very little, but that's probably OK. Marginal costs go up. Average costs also go up. Uh, I called it. One marginal cost one. Nope. Average cost increase, marginal cost increase because of that negative external economies of scale. And so I've actually been pretty pretty lucky with this because this looks pretty good. So we get to this new price. And I've been pretty nice I'm pretty lucky with how I've drawn this. And this new, new eventual price here, each firm is, I mean in this instance, they are actually making less, but it's not really important. Because we have more firms. And each firm is now making a different quantity, potentially a different quantity, could in principle it could be the same, um, but potentially a different but potentially a different quantity. And we're still now in, so after those costs have increased, right, so some firms entered, which pushed supply curve to the right. Also costs went up, which does push supply curve to the left, but the only way that this works out is if supply ultimately does move to the right at least a little bit, um. And the effect of this pushes prices down a down a little bit, but it pushes so the effect of more firms pushes prices down, but more firms also push costs up. And so as prices come down and costs come up at some point those things meet where profits end up being zero. And that's what we're drawn, that's what we're kind of drawn in here in one go, which was in some sense lucky in some sense unlucky, um, but it was some sense mostly lucky, uh, where we've pushed our supply curve out to the right a little bit as more firms enter, offset somewhat by costs going up. But because costs have gone up, our firm is producing optimally at zero profit. Particularly because that minimum average cost has increased, right, Par. That was the minimum of the original average cost. This P2, this is the minimum. Of the Of the new average costs. Where there's more firms competing for the limited pool of inputs. It's a little bit more to talk about here. But, any questions before we do a little bit more. Big thing to note. Is in our, in our neutral economies scale, price got pushed down to the same level as it was before the demand shock. Right, because There was no external economies to scale, neutral external economy to scale. Now price gets pushed down a little bit in the long run, but it doesn't get pushed all the way back down to where we started. It gets pushed down somewhat, but not all the way back down to to PSA, that minimum of the original average costs, because more firms means that costs are more expensive and so if prices did get pushed all the way down to the original minimum average cost, then firms would be losing money because the minimum average cost is now higher than it used to be. And so we still end up with the price being above, you know, this is the new price, long run equilibrium price, the old long run equilibrium price. So the new, the other little last bit I guess is to think about, The long run The long run supply curve. Our long run supply, we had our demand. We had our supply in the short run. And we also have long run supply. Our long run supply is still, is, is not flat because of that negative external scale, but it's not as steep as our short-run supply because it's partially offset by increasing number of firms, and so we get some sort of long-run supply curve. Which does not depend on the number of firms, because if demand were to increase prices don't change, prices don't, prices will in the short run increase by a lot. Then come down somewhat, not come all the way back down to where they started, and so when demand increases we get. Different amounts of this of this change. Any Questions, questions, concerns, problems here, yes. Does Um, intercept demand at the same point as supply. It's a good question, it's something I was thinking about as I was drawing this, um, so that's, so the question was what, what, what, why is, why is this, right, why are these all in the same spot, which seems odd, right, um, so the, the argument is that this is our, Short run supply where we have sort of endn firms and the marginal costs initially, and this is gonna be our initial, initial level of demand, right. If demand were to increase, To D1, right, there's more demand, so there's more, there's more, um, there's more firms, and there's more, and there's more costs for each individual firm, that's what we would expect in the long run, we would end up on a new, there would be a new short run, Supply curve with the new number of firms, the new marginal cost. Um, so it's just a, it's a, it's a consequence of the fact that we started with DO and then we start with that initial demand level. If we had a higher demand level, then there's a different short-run supply curve that that is the that is the short run supply curve. This is gonna be a complicated one, that is the short-run supply curve that is associated with the long run equilibrium of that demand, that level of demand. So it's facing D0. We get a short run so we, we, we find that the equilibrium is such that there's end north firms. Um, and that gets you an equilibrium here. If the, if the demand was D1, then the longer run equilibrium would have more firms. The, the longer equilibrium went out with more firms and so the the the the supply curve in green is the short run supply curve associated with the number of firms that gives us a long run equilibrium at D1. And it was a bit of a, it's a bit of a cyclical tongue twistery type thing, but it's fine, um. It's a bit weird because there's a lot of self-referential things in here, um, and the answer to that is yes, there's a lot of self-referential things in here. It's not, it's, this is the these problems, and that's the case anyway, even in the neutral economies of scale. There's a lot of, it's, it's not like assume A, A gets you B, B gets you C, it's. How do we make for the equilibrium, how do we make everything work together so that A, B, and C are all in sync with each other, um, and that can be tricky. That some would address your question at least of why we had that weird looking. Why was it right there, and, and yes, the, the long run supply because it doesn't depend on a number of firms, that's, That's both black and green, right, that's the same long run supply regardless of. What demand looks like. Yeah Longer supply curve comes out of these sort of dynamic of these sort of dynamics. So initially we were, so this is one point, On our long run supply curve, to our initial our initial long run equilibrium, that was one point on our long run supply curve. Because we're in equilibrium. This year This is another point on our long run supply curve, because if demand increases, then supply would change such that we end up at this point. If we were to keep going, right, if demand were to be higher again. Then supply would shift down, would shift to the right again. Supplied short run. Demand again supply in the short run, with even more firms, even more marginal cost. And we would have another point on our long run supply curve. So we're just pinging together all of the long-run equilibrium levels, I guess. I don't want to put that in because that gets. Real messy real fast. So yeah, we're we're we're plugging together all of these points here. For different levels of demand. This is gonna save us a lot when we do a bit of comparative statics, which we'll have time for good, we do a bit of comparative statics for price ceilings and price floors, having this long run supply is gonna save us a lot of, Real annoyance. Any questions, problems? Songs. in a lot of cases. It's gonna be useful. OK. Yeah, I wanna get mostly comparative statics. We'll talk very briefly about producer and consumer surplus. There's nothing really new here, so I'm not gonna, not gonna harp on about it too much. Right, consumer surplus is utility of consumption minus the price actually paid, so you get that nice little consumer surplus triangle. Typically produce a surplus, revenue from sales minus the sum of the marginal costs of production. You'll notice that it's not exactly profit, it's profit plus the fixed costs. Um, you can get, you can get this out of definitions and things, so there is a, there is some difference between producer surplus and um and profit levels. Um, Part of that does mean when we talk about long run and comparing long-run outcomes, we need to be a little bit careful for producer surplus, because if there's a lot more firms, then there's a lot more fixed costs being paid. So even if it looks like producer surplus is increasing, that might be the case, but it kind of might not be the case, um, for a fixed number of firms, producer surplus is a really good way of thinking about producer welfare. Once the number of firms can change, right, because if you have one firm pay paying fixed costs, that's that's fine, you have 10 firms paying the paying the same fixed costs, so being paid 10 times, that, that does actually have an effect. Um, so we need to be a little bit careful about using producer surplus as our measure of producer welfare when firms firm numbers change, um. But we still mostly do anyway, um, we talk about external cost or benefit, benefit to the rest of society, I think that'll now be week 11 that we do that we do externalities. We talk about government revenue, which we'll talk about now. Uh, and you talk about 10 that, you know, you add all those things together and you get total surplus. Consumer surplus, producer surplus, any external benefits or costs, and any government revenue or government costs, gives you your total surplus. And we get some really nice things, welfare is found looking at the market level modelling, um, and I'm not gonna spend any time on this because we've done it lots. Right, we have quantity, dollars per unit. We have demand, we have supply. And look, we have consumer surplus. And we have producer surplus. As of now we have no government revenue, we have no externalities. We'll talk about externalities from week 11, talk about government revenue. In the next slide. This is our equilibrium level, this is assuming that we sell Q. Star units at price Par. I will do one more thing actually here, there's no nothing we we can well this might be the equilibrium consumer and surplus, that doesn't mean it's, The only thing that might happen in the world, right? So it's completely fine to talk about, and we will need to talk about consumer surplus, producer surplus in a world like, so if we have demand. And we have supply. Because demand is marginal utility, supply is marginal costs, sort of for the rea with all the caveats we've talked about in the past. You could have a situation where producers, Producers are making and selling this many and they sell it at, This price In which case our producer surplus is gonna be this region here. Because it's below what they sell, above their marginal cost, up to the amount they actually sell. While consumers who for whatever reason, Consumers buy this many. And they pay this price, in which case, consumer surplus. Right, this market obviously isn't in equilibrium, at least unless there's some sort of really weird stuff going on. This market's not in equilibrium, but like this could be a thing that is the case for some reason at some times, right, you could have something, you could in principle have something vaguely like this if you had, say, government taxes, making sure that there was a gap, making a gap between price buyers pay and price sellers receive, and also there's foreign imports coming in that our domestic consumers are consuming. Right, and then you might have government consumer surplus and producer surplus look like this, maybe, right, you wouldn't have it look quite and but also there's limitations on how much is available to buy, right? I, I'm making up a story. My point is, consumer surplus surplus, we always draw them as the big triangles. And in our normal equilibrium outcome, that would be the case. But it doesn't have to be. Right, it depends on the the the producer surplus depends on how much they produce and sell, what price they get paid for it. Consumer surplus depends on how much they consume. What price they pay for it. And if production and consumption are the same, then you get some nice outcomes, if the price buyers and pet sellers are paying are the same, then you get some nice outcomes. But that doesn't have to be the case, and when we do a tax, it won't be, for example. So imports would be, would be an example, right? And also I'm not saying this is Reasonable, I'm just saying like, this is a thing, you know, keep in mind, other stuff can happen.

SPEAKER 3
OK, yes. There's still um stop On the example No, no, no,

SPEAKER 1
Pea Star, not, not uh, not necessarily.eaar would be, I mean, Pea Star is, if we're if we're thinking about these, Peace Star is here, so. This is a this is a, this is intended to be a very strange looking object. It's really just, Trying to heavily emphasise the thing that matters for producers is how much they produce and what price they sell it for. The thing that matters for consumers is how much they consume and and how much they pay for it. Because when we do tax, for example, the price buyers pay and the price sellers receive is different. The the the quantities quantities are the same, but the prices are different. Let's go through and do some tax stuff, some work on tax. Yeah. So, we're gonna put in the tax in a perfectly competitive market. I'm actually not run out of time, we're actually run time. Let's see how we go. We have a, we have our firm, we have our market level. Marginal cost Average cost, generally speaking, we assume that we're in long run equilibrium. To begin with, Short run supply given the initial number of firms and marginal costs. Q, which is Q times N. Cue star. It's really put everything in. I would encourage you strongly in, say, exams to make sure you do put everything in. Partly because otherwise you, it is, you know, not entirely correct. But in no small part because if you've made small errors somewhere. But everything's labelled, we can figure out that it's a small error, but if you've made small errors somewhere and nothing's labelled or things aren't labelled properly, then it can be hard to tell that the thing that you've made is only a small error, right, and so it looks like a big error, even though it's only actually a relatively small issue. OK, so we're in lower equilibrium, everyone's happy, everything's grand. Tax happens. We throw a tax into this market. Short run effects are all fine. We're gonna model our taxes using a tax wedge model, uh, so a tax wedge, so a gap between the price buyers pay and the price sellers receive. You can do it by talking about an increasing marginal cost, but now that we have a marginal cost. Curve, increasing marginal costs is gonna be a pain because your marginal cost curve moves, your average cost curve moves in a way that's not entirely obvious. Your supply curve has to shift all sorts of things move. We don't wanna move costs unless we absolutely have to, right, because it's hard to, it's hard to do that, it's much easier if they can just be fixed. So we'll do it using a tax wedge method. Buyers pay, you know, currently buyers are paying $8 a unit, government comes in and says, every time you sell something, we're gonna charge you $2. And so the effect of that is price goes up by a bit less than $2 for the buyer. Buyer pays $9 government takes $2 seller gets $7 right, that's the, that's gonna be our breakdown. And so we're putting in a $2 tax wedge. This is the size of our tax. And so when we go and we work out the new short on equilibrium after that tax has been put in. We put in our tax Yeah. Right, because if we have the tax there, if buyers pay. This much sellers receive. This much, and the gap between what they buy, then they're both, they're both maximising, given they're sorry, they both then buy QT. They're both maximising subject to the conditions that they face, subject to um buyers paying the buying price, they want to buy QSub tea, sellers sign at the seller price, they want to sell Qub tea. Um, and the gap between the prices is exactly the tax that the government's taking. So again, it's kind of one of these circular things of this is where everything works out nicely. Again, you can do this just by shifting marginal cost shifting supply up by T units, um, but there's a lot of things that have to shift if you that have to shift for you to do that, so we won't do it that way. Any questions, concerns here? Oh That's all fine, except of course that our our firms are pretty miffed. Our firms are pretty miffed because they're making negative profit. Right, because average cost is way up here. Price is way down here, so their average profit is negative, so they're pretty miffed. Negative profit. Questions, concerns, issues. Cool. And so in the and so when we go our long run, when we go through our long run, oh, I should do I should I should do this last little bit here. I will remove this but we'll put it in for now, um, when we talk about consumer and producer surplus, this is where again the consumer surplus producer surplus aren't gonna be the big triangles, they're gonna be slightly smaller triangles, right, um, because the buyers are paying, Consumers are paying PB. And they're buying Qub T and so we get some nice consumer surplus. Our producers are receiving QS and they're making QT units, sorry, PS making QT units, so we get some producer surplus. The government is taking home a bunch of money of their own, because every unit that's sold up to those QT units, the government's taking on $2 of tax, they get their $2 tax from every unit being sold, and so we have some nice, Taxation in the middle here, usually called government revenue, it's called tax here. And there's some dead weight loss. Right, a dead weight loss. From micro one is the fact that we've, Um, Yeah, this is a surplus that could have existed but it doesn't because of the tax. The usual thing. Any questions, concerns? Yeah. That's what The long run So there's two ways we can do this. We can do this the hard way, we can do this the easy way. The hard way is what we've done in the past in micro one, but we didn't have quite as much machinery, particularly we didn't have that long run supply curve machinery. So the long way is to look at this and say, OK, firms making negative profit, that means firms enter the market, firms entering the market push the supply curve to the right. It's gonna push supply curve to the right. Some amount until profit gets pushed back to being zero, I go to the left, ugh, thank you, I'm glad some people were looking at me like I was crazy. It's always comforting. When you're doing something wrong and people look at you like you're crazy. Supply curve gets pushed to the left because our firms are leaving the market because profit is negative. And how far does that go? Well that goes until our firms are making zero profit again. And so if we pushed, If we push say this far, let's see if that was far enough. Um, If we push this far then we pop in pop in our tax wedge. This was actually pretty close, that was not really my intent, um, but anyway, now tax wedge and, So this is our supply curve, short run. When firms leave the market, so there's now less firms. In terms of the market has less firms, uh, we moved to this new S, we put in the tax wedge, everything's fine, our producers are now selling. And now earning PS Prime. Our sellers, sorry, our consumers are getting PB prime. And this is fine, we're now in equilibrium again, short run equilibrium, we're now sorry, back in our long run equilibrium, long equilibrium with tax, right, because, In the short run, our market is clearing, the amount being demanded the same as the amount being um supplied, quantity demand is quantity supplied, and the, and in our firm level, profit is being pushed back to zero. And so the in this particular example, the in the long run, the entirety of the tax is being paid by the consumer. Right, the government comes in and says there's a $2 tax. In the short run, the firms eat some of that, but then profit is negative, so, so some of the firms go out of business, the reduced the reduced supply of goods pushes the price up for everyone, for consumers and producers. It's good for producers, it's bad for consumers, um, until the price that the producers are getting is back up to that same minimum cost, same minimum average cost until profit gets pushed back up to zero, which means that the buyers are taking the full brunt. In terms of the price change, certainly, the buyers are taking the full brunt of the change in. Of the tax, the buyers take the full brunt of the tax in terms of the change in price. $2 tax price got $2 in the long run. Questions, concerns, how we time. Questions, concerns, problems. I made a big assumption here that I wanna be able to not have to make. The big assumption that I made here, any takers? Yep. I assume mutual economies of scale. I didn't have to, right, some firms, some some industries have that, but some, some don't. This is gonna be really, really horrible if I try and do anything other than neutral economies of scale and actually move supply curves around, it's just gonna be really ugly. So instead, Let's keep things nice and easy for ourselves. And use our long run supply curve, we have it, we should use it. If we're in a world with neutral economies of scale, we know what our long-run supply curve looks like, supply. Long run. This is our long run supply curve. Our producers are gonna produce according to this. And so we can take our, we can take our tax wedge. We pop it in and we get the same things that we, and we get the same outcome that we had, right, the PB is what we said it was in the long run, PPS is what we said it was in the long run, everything's fine. We didn't have to worry about actually moving the supply curve, uh we just looked at demand and long run supply. And if we're thinking about not neutral external economies of scale, then having a long run supply curve means we can do that, do, do the analysis for negative or positive external economies of scale very easily, because if we have negative external economies of scale, oh, not too far, if we have negative external economies of scale, we're actually gonna do it in yellow, in green, sorry, um, then we have a different long run supply curve. So if we have negative external economies of scale, we might have, Long run supply Looks like this. As firms leave, it becomes cheaper for the initial firms to produce goods, for the remaining firms to produce goods. There's less competition for inputs. Right, as firms leave. So in that case, If we grab our tax wedge. We see that in the long run, the price received by sellers does actually go down a little bit, doesn't go down as much as in the short run. But it does fall a little bit. So our long run prices for suppliers goes down, not as much as it did in the short run, but at least a little bit. So this is the government charges a $2 tax, initially it split 5050. And then eventually as firms leave, the remaining firms becomes a bit cheaper for them to run, and so eventually you have a situation where the firm takes a 50 cents cut to the amount they're getting, and the consumers pay $1.50 of the $2 rather than the full amount. And that's possible, right, that's a that's a thing that might happen. Questions, concerns. We can do the opposite. Right, because if we have. Negative, sorry to have positive external economies of scale, that means when the industry increases in size, when there's more firms, it becomes cheaper to run. And so if we have positive external economies of scale, A lower on supply is downward sloping. Because you have more and more firms, that minimum average cost gets lower and lower, or in this case, as you have fewer and fewer firms, that minimum average cost becomes higher and higher. And so here this is even, this is.
