SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Alright, about 50. So we got started. Welcome back everyone for week 9 now. We're gonna return to our usual schedules, so we're actually doing sort of stuff we would normally do in week 8 because of that whole that that weird change. So this really is a direct flow on from the stuff in week 7, right, in week 7 we did production. Um, and broadly speaking, most of what we said in week 7, not quite all, but a lot of what we said in week 7 was what we said in week 1 and 2, and then we did a little bit extra about costs, right, and we talked about finding the cost of the firm and and that kind of stuff, and, and you did that in tutorials, um, last week, right, so you, you've done this stuff. Uh, and then we had that weird week last week, which was there, so we had some voting stuff before the election, and so that you've had that in your tutorial before the election. All that we put to one side and we return to uh uh firm behaviour, to do profit maxim profit maximisation and later on we'll move through to perfect competition as well. In terms of admin, I don't think I have really any admin to bring up at this time. Um, things are back to our schedule is back to normal for the rest of the semester, Wednesday and Wednesday and Friday lectures, Tuesday through Thursday. Um, the project is due, I do actually have an admin piece. The project is due, uh, the, the. The draught of the project is due in 2 weeks, I'm pretty sure. Is that right? People nodding, excellent. It's due on Monday week 11 to your um to your peer reviewer, you'll be given your peer reviewer sometime in week 10, right? You'll receive an email to you which says, which will say, broadly speaking, um, here is your peer here are your two peer reviewers, please send the work to them on Monday by Monday, here are the two people that you should expect to see stuff from. So you'll get that, that that'll go through by email, um, to your to your student email address, the only system that we really have to make that work. Um, and still be private, yep. I Yeah, uh, no, so for groups I will send out an email, uh, I will look at what I did last year. I can't quite remember what I did for groups last year, and whatever I did for groups last year is what I will do for groups this year. Um, there may also be, there will also be some issues around, um, the format, so people, I, I wanna kind of, I wanna, I will set it up and there will be some emails and announcements and things to make this work. Um, I will set it up so that if you're doing it, if you're planning to do a video, you are peer reviewed by other people who are planning to do videos and, and for different types of things.

SPEAKER 2
Yeah. confirm that there won't be a situation. Where one person gets to 3500. pieces that they.

SPEAKER 1
Have to work through it, I believe that will not be the case. I will, I will endeavour to make that not be happening, and in any case that will be very unlikely anyway, but I will endeavour not to have that not happen. um, as a broad idea and I know you guys in the room are not necessarily um what's the word? Uh, representative of the, of the class as a whole, but is anyone here who here is planning to work in groups, just so I have a vague idea. Yeah, so you can see looking around that there's not a lot, right? Most people are working individually, and that's what I would have expected, right, that's, that's pretty common looking thinking about it, thinking about what happened last year. Um, the other actual piece of admin is that the final exam timetable has been released. The final exam for this course is as early as it can possibly be, which is Thursday of what would be week 13 in the morning. So it is, it is 9 to 12:30, cause it's half hour reading time, 3 hour writing time, uh, or maybe it's 15 minutes reading time, and 3 hours writing time, 15 minutes reading time, 3 hours writing time. So it's 9 to 12:15 on. Mon on Thursday, the whatever, which is week 13. Sorry. Not too far away. So it's reasonably far away, but like it is the earliest the exam could be. Um, in terms of the structure of that exam, the same as the mid-semester, we'll have about a quarter to 20th-ish be multiple choice, the rest be short answer and the same sort of thing that we had for the for the mid-semester. Um, in terms of difficulty, it will be about the same as the mid-semester, except obviously on a wider variety of topics. In terms of content being covered, it's the entire course, including stuff that was before the mid-semester, including what we will do in week 12. Right, so we'll do a little tiny bit of stuff in week 12, we'll do, we'll do an hour in week 12 on uh experimental economics. On the Wednesday, and then the Friday lecture will be a review lecture, but that week 12 stuff is accessible in the exam, and we'll be assessing the exam. Ah, yes. Yeah, so I get this question a lot and it's kind of a hard question to answer. The question was about waiting between term like first teaching period material and second teaching material, and it's a hard question to answer because if you had a question like, When thinking about, When thinking about producer theory versus consumer theory, what are the similarities and differences, right, is that just week one or just just early stuff or just late stuff, um, But it's kind of a bit of both, you would expect to see, you should expect to see questions that are specifically about the stuff from before the break. You should expect to see questions that are specifically about after the break, you, you should expect to see some questions that are that are that cover both at the same time. So you might see like here's a, here's our problem. Part A, model this using game theory, part B, model this using externalities, right, is is is is a question that is not like, not unreasonable. So that comes from that draws from both before and after the break, we haven't done externalities, externalities yet but we will. So I don't, I don't have a breakdown for you. I, I, I, I can't comment, I would be I would be surprised that I can't comment on that kind of question, yeah.

SPEAKER 3
Uh Yes. So suppose we're, we're, we've picked an essay on, I don't know, some policy and we wanna talk both about behavioural economics from. One section of the course and then moral hazard, can we take from different sections or do we have to narrow.

SPEAKER 1
No, it's a good question and the answer is you, you almost must be drawing from different sections of the course. I don't say must, masters maybe a little bit strong, but like, it would be very difficult to do well if to do your time well, if you only took from one component of the course. The expectation would be that you would be looking at some kind of real world problem, and you'd be saying, here's how we can draw some stuff that's our basic too good model stuff and and talk about it a little bit. But then actually, there's actually some uncertainty, so we should talk about that as well, and there's actually some stuff about market structure that's really important, so we'll bring that in, which is what we'll talk about over the next couple of next week or so. Um, so yeah, you, you are expected to bring in things from multiple parts of the course. I've said this privately to a couple of people, so I should put it in an open forum as well. Typically, the structure, if you're doing a report, the structure would broadly be, um, introduction, three main things that you talk about and then conclusion. Um, there's 2 standard ways of doing that. One way is you have 3 things that are bits of the course. Right, and that's pretty normal, and that's totally fine. Uh, the other standard way that's totally norm that's pretty normal and totally fine is to have two things that are directly from the course and then one that is related in some way, right, that might be an extension on some of the stuff that we've done, or it might be something that we could have done but didn't like it's in the textbook for example, so that we could have done but decided not to. Um, it's still sort of micro two-esque, but we haven't necessarily done specifically here, because it's a natural extension or it's, it's tangential but not exactly what we've done or something like that, um, is totally fine and pretty normal. If you're coming and you're submitting if if you're doing like 2 months. And then a macro section, that's not OK. If you're coming in and just doing a here we're gonna do a big pile of game theory analysis. Um, that's really not OK either, right, because you should be drawing from different parts of the course. Or if you just come in and say, here's a big pile of macro analysis, that's kind of worthless. Um, so I've said a lot more than your answer question I hope, but, but have I addressed your question and a whole lot more? Yes, excellent. Um, Any questions or queries. OK. Final exam. You know, final exam has cheat sheet, as with the mid-semester, right, one a 4 page handwritten both sides. Alright. Content. Well, it took us 10 minutes. So we talked about in in week 1 and 2, mostly we talked about consumption, in week 7 we talked about production. And we want to say that there's a lot of similarity, and we sort of, I tried to emphasise, but I'll just be a bit more systematic about it, that there's a lot of similarities there, but there are some differences, right, um. When we talk about what we, what the, what the people in the model want, right, what consumers want, consumers want utility, which they get from consumption. Um, that's the thing that they're after, whereas producers, the thing that they want is they want revenue which they get from sales, which look pretty similar, right? You, you, you put in your inputs and you get your output. Your output might be utility, your output might be revenue. But the way that you pay for those, right, the cost if you like, of doing these things is in these two cases modelled very, very differently, right, because for utilities, sorry, for consumers, we were talking about you had a fixed amount of money and you had your income and you paid for goods from your income, um. And that's how, how we lost, what we, what we had to give up, right, was the money that we earned as income, whereas for producers it's modelled as costs of production. Right, and so in particular, um, yeah. Yeah. And so what you what you're giving up is a bit different. Notably, whether we think of money at the end of the day as being valuable is different between consumers and producers. We typically don't think of consumers as benefiting from money, right? The point of money is to have things, right, money is not useful to you, as in you don't gain intrinsic joy from having money. Um, at least in some sense, hopefully not, cos that would, I'm sure I'm sure there are people that do, and if you do, that's fine, but like we typically don't think of people as gaining intrinsic joy from having money. We like having things and money gets us things, but the money isn't useful, right? And we save money so that we can have things in the future, and that's fine, that's why in some that's how money might be considered valuable because we then have the money to spend on things later, but money itself is not valuable. For firms, money is valuable, money is the thing that they want. Right, intrinsically the thing that they want, it's not intrinsically the thing that the consumers want, it's just useful for them for other reasons. Uh, particularly on how we talk about costs, we talk about, um, very differently in terms of the constraints that we face in that consumers we talk about as being credit constrained. You have I dollars and that's your, that's how much money you've got, right, and then you split that between the two goods that you're buying. So we really do talk about consumers being credit constrained, maximise utility subject to the credit constraint that you face. We don't typically think about producers as being credit constrained. Obviously in the real world they are, right, to a certain extent, but we don't hear talk about producers being credit constrained, we talk about producers having revenue and costs and your profit is revenue minus costs. But there's no constraint there that says, and also you can't spend on costs more than a certain amount of money, which is what a credit constraint would be for firms. You can model firms like that, but we don't here, right, your initial thing is it is not done that way. And so there is that difference there in terms of, in terms of how the constraint works. In terms of risk preferences, we have pretty standard, like our our consumers, we almost always said that they were risk averse. We talked a little about other things, but basically consumers have our utility function, and our utility function has diminishing marginal utility of money which which flows through into being risk averse. Um, And all of our real world data suggests that that's true, right, when you investigate people it looks like they have diminishing marginal utility of money, and if we think for two seconds about how money works, it seems pretty reasonable that we have diminishing marginal utility of money, um, right? If I get a million dollars, oh my god, right, it's life changing and amazing. If my usual example is Gina Rinehart gets a million dollars, she does not notice because she has thousands of them already. It doesn't matter. Um, whereas for producers, for firms, we do what we do just, we always make, we essentially always make our firms risk neutral. It's, it's easier, firms carry out money, they don't have a utility function as such. They just are, they, they have linear utility in money, which is to say risk neutral, which is to say they have no utility function. Money is money. Cool, right, the 1st $100 for a firm is just as good as the 100th $100 for the firm. Because we have these different assumptions, there's gonna be links between how we model these and how we think about them, but it's not gonna be the same, not gonna be exactly the same at least, right, because we make different assumptions and so we get different things. In both cases it's maximise your thing subject to your sort of vague collection of constraints, but the way we talk about the constraints is different, the way we talk about the thing we're maximising is a bit different, so they are a little bit different in some other ways. Any questions? Yes. Um Um Revenue is different from profit, yes, firms intrinsically want profit, um, so here I do say they want revenue from sales and what they lose is cost of production. Mm, I see where you're coming from. I could have said what they want is profit, um, but I want to highlight, I wanted to highlight it in the sense of the thing that you want is more revenue. But to get that revenue you have to give up costs. So, so, ultimately what they end up wanting is profit, but yeah, if the firm had a way of getting more revenue without increasing costs, they would absolutely want to do that. It's just they, they can't do that, right, more revenue means more costs. Yeah.

SPEAKER 3
Just to double check, we're ignoring We.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah, we don't have a debt idea in these models, right, so, so you can have, you, you can talk about things like, uh, for you're talking about thinking back for consumers in particular for for sure, um, yeah, so you can build in things like for for for firms it doesn't matter anyway because they are not credit constrained, and so, and it's also a one shot, we're all doing one shot models anyway for firms, so there's no like over. It's long-term versus short-term, so I shouldn't say that, um. But no, we don't worry about, we don't talk about debt in any significant way to here today. Uh, for consumers, you absolutely can, and you can talk about lifetime earnings and lifetime consumption profiles versus earning profiles which basically say that you should go into debt when you're young, because your consumption is valuable but your income is low, consumption is useful for you, but your income is low, so you should go into debt, um, knowing that eventually you'll be able to pay that off. Because your income will increase, but your consumption will not increase by as much, um, and so for you guys, so for people of my age, the way that works is taking a mortgage, right, um, for people of your age, the way that works is taking on HECS debt. Right, so your consumption exceeds your. Right, you're going into debt to be, to be here. Right. If it's debt that you hold, it's it, sorry, if you in most cases, right, for you guys. It's a weird way to say that, anyway, um, does that address your, yeah, please, yeah, we don't talk about it too much. OK. Any questions? Right. So throughout all of this, we do recognise that firms are really complicated objects, right, firms are complicated objects, we've got workers, workers in our firms are trying to minimise efforts subject to keeping their job potentially, or they maybe they're looking for promotions and so they want to balance the chance of promotion against the effort required and you do a sort of expected utility kind of calculation for how much effort to put in. I wouldn't worry about writing this down, people are hurriedly writing down, I wouldn't worry too much about writing this one down. Um, so that's all the workers are doing, managers are kind of the same as workers, it's just working at a different level, the chance of promotion might be higher, but broadly speaking, you know, you, you're working as much as you, you're working the minimum amount to a certain extent. If, if assuming work is costly, you're working the correct amount for you to either not get fired or to maximise promotion subject to the cost of, of doing this. Whereas you have owners here who are potentially trying to maximise profit of the firm, um, But who might have issues around principal agent problems because they're trying to maximise profit, but they can only do that by paying workers and managers, and so there's probably a principal agent problem in here, owners might potentially have short-run versus long-run issues, a lot of stuff that goes into here that is studied in organisational economics, and we are going to. Ignore all of this, right, this is why I'm saying don't worry about writing this down too much. We're going to ignore all of these things. I'm just saying, look, again, this is an economists aren't stupid kind of kind of statement. We know that this is all the case, we're gonna ignore all of these things and we're gonna just have our nice firms be simple, singular entities that are out there to maximise profit. We're keeping things easy. All of this stuff under the hood is part of organisational economics, it's interesting, not what we're gonna do here. Any questions? Lovely, so our firms are singular objects maximising profit. And so how do they do that? Well, we're try if we're trying to maximise profit, one way that we might argue for this is we can argue this from the, so the way we're going to maximise profit, I, I, I should have gotten you guys to, to say this, but like, we know this, we maximise profit by making marginal revenue equal marginal cost, right, we should hopefully from micro one or from, Various other places already be aware of this, but we do want to argue it and be a little bit, you know, careful and whatever, um, so, one way that we might argue that the best thing to do is to set marginal revenue call marginal cost, we can pop down this thing on a, Output dollar graph. Right, so we talk about how much output we have and then how much money that output either creates or costs. And we can put in a revenue curve, we can put in a costs curve, and so we might have, Revenue So revenue increases, we sell more stuff, we get more money. And we have also have costs. As we sell more stuff, The costs go up, And for this I've done this as a diminishing marginal product, sorry uh uh decreasing returns to scale, so it costs, as we increase our production, our costs go up faster than our production increases, right, so we have, which is again, pretty normal in terms of assumptions and in terms of real world. And so we want to, and so our firm has profit, has a has some level of profit, profit is revenue minus costs. And so if I look at a particular, Quantity level, the profit from selling that many goods. This is the revenue from QN. This is the cost of Q. And so the gap there. Is The profit. Of Q Noor. Which is measured in dollars. Questions, problems. Right, if we're wanting to make. Um, profit as big as we possibly can. We want to pick the queue that'll make profit as big as we possibly can. Where are we going to look for profit being as big as it can be? Thank you. It's the quantity level in our graph that maxim that makes that maximises profit here. Yeah. The biggest distance between revenue and costs, I was really hoping the first person would be wrong in the way of saying this level. Um, because that would not be true, right, that would be zero profit, um, because revenue is equal to costs, but it's the point where the lines intersect, so it must be equipped anyway. But you didn't, no one, no one fell into my cunning trap. Um, and so we're looking for the biggest gap between revenue and costs, between between revenue and costs, which is probably about here. Looks like it's about here. It's gonna be the biggest gap First thing to note, it's a little hard to find, the graph isn't that it isn't that informative for us, which is why we typically work with marginal revenue and marginal cost, it's gonna be a lot easier to find these things, um, but we still do get marginal revenue equals marginal cost, as our as our profit maximisation idea, right, because if we're, I shouldn't say the call is queue not call queue star. Because if we're down here somewhere in terms of production. And we look at our costs and we look at our revenue, marginal revenue is the slope of revenue, marginal cost is the slope of costs, and we see that at this lower level or even at Q0, right, marginal revenue, marginal cost, margin we see that marginal cost is lower than marginal revenue, right, the slope of costs is cost, the cost curve is flatter than the revenue curve. Um, and so marginal revenue is less than marginal costs, and that's not optimal because if marginal, sorry, marginal costs are less than marginal revenue, that's not optimal because if marginal costs are less than marginal revenue, we should produce more stuff and make more profit. Right, so that's what that's why Q0 is not optimal. Because marginal cost is less than marginal revenue. At the same time, if we go up here somewhere, call it Q1. We're still getting profit, profit's still positive, it's nice, but we could do better because we can look at marginal revenue, we can look at marginal cost, the cost curve is steeper than the marginal revenue curve, marginal cost is higher than marginal revenue, and so we can do better by, we can do better by reducing our our um costs, reducing our production slightly, and these things start to and these curves pull apart more, and we get more profit. So the only time when we're gonna be optimising is when the slope, Is the same It's pretty close, it was probably a little bit low, if that's OK. It's when the slope of marginal, it's when the slope of the revenue curve and the slope of the cost curve are the same, that's when they're gonna be the furthest apart, and that means marginal revenue equals marginal cost. Any questions? Yes. Like In lots of different places. Yeah, so here I've kind of, here I've done this the nice one which is a convex cost, so it's, it's nice and then and then linear revenue, so keep things nice. um, yes, if you're in a weird world, Or, or just if if the world is such that you have something like revenue, ah no, let's not do it that way, if you have something like, Revenue, I don't know why that would be revenue like that, and then costs are like, Oh That's not a good example, but you know, costs do something strange, right? Um, then it's really unclear what the profit maximising level, it'll still be at a level where marginal revenue cause marginal cost, but if there's lots of different levels where marginal revenue marginal costs, then you would have to just look at each of them separately and find out which profit is biggest, and there's no nothing nice there. So yeah, in economic analysis, we almost always assume costs are convex to avoid that problem. Revenue is not a 45 degree angle, I've done it 45 degree here, that is not by, that is not for any special reason. That is, can I change, no, can I, I think I can change this. I've done it at about 45 um. It won't let me do this. I know I can do this. Oh, I won't do it. No, there's no special reason why it's at 45 degrees. I just have it here. There's no special reason it's a straight line. In fact, right, there's no I have drawn it as a straight line here for ease. There's no special reason why it has to be, and we'll see some examples where it's not, lots of examples where it's not. Any other question? Yes.

SPEAKER 2
What um What does this guide We're not up to

SPEAKER 1
our invisible hand yet, uh, invisible hand idea yet, this is, this is not this is not invisible hand, this is just so so. Taking a big step back, the invisible hand idea is that the market operating efficiently will lead the market operating at an equilibrium level will lead to an efficient outcome anyway. We have no market here, here we have a firm that is profit maximising. Um, the the invisible hand argument which we will talk about today, or sorry, this week, is this idea of if our firms are individually profit maximising and our consumers are individually consumer um utility maximising. Uh, and things are working as intended, then it doesn't matter that the firms are only interested in themselves and that the consumers are only interested in themselves, nevertheless, the quantity consumed is the socially desired amount, right, um, even though no one's pushing for the social exir amount to be consumed, it just happens that that's the equilibrium. Um, we'll talk about it today. But it's not here. So we're talking about this week, but it's not here yet. This is just firms profit maximising. OK. I will try and, no, I won't try the same graph. We also do this on our more normal output against dollars per unit kind of graph, where we have output measured against dollars per unit. On our previous graph we had pretty much constant marginal revenue, spoke revenue curve was pretty constant, and so we had something like a marginal revenue curve, and we had a marginal cost, which was increasing. This was kind of the, this was based on what we had previously, we had pretty flat margin revenue, we had increasing marginal cost, and we make arguments that say we profit maximise at, At Qtar Yep, at QStar, and we have all of our usual arguments that we've made in the past, right, you wouldn't, you would not choose to produce at 10, sorry, um, because marginal revenue exceeds marginal costs and so you can make more profit by by having um more production. You wouldn't choose to to produce at Q1 because you, you're overproducing, your marginal cost exceeds marginal revenue by reducing production you can increase profit. And so we get marginal revenue equals marginal cost from these kinds of arguments. Any questions, problems? This is also why we like this, right, it was, it was kind of hard on this graph to figure out where QStar was optimal level. It's really easy here, where the lines intersect. OK. We can also do this by the equations which we haven't done, so we we can also do this, you know, we can, we've kind of hand weighed, we've drawn pictures, and we've made rough arguments, but we can also be a little bit more specific with this, right, um, and so we can say that our firm is out there trying to maximise profit, right, so the profit for our firm of making units, how do I, I'll try and keep this the same as I've done elsewhere. The profit is the firm chooses how much to produce. They see a price that they're stuck with, sorry, that's not quite true, I just have that the firm chooses how much to produce. Let's keep it this way first. The firm is out there, they're choosing which to produce, they get some profit from that. How much profit do they get? Well, they get the revenue from producing Q and they pay the costs. Of producing you. Sorry, very long day. They pay the cost of producing cube. This is hopefully OK. There's no constraints on this, as I said, there's no credit constraints here. So just, this is what they're trying to do. There's no, there's no subject to the condition that costs are less than something or anything like that, they have costs, that's fine. Because this is an unconstrained optimisation problem, we've covered how to talk about those and how to think and how to how to how to solve those things, which is we take derivative, we make it zero. For the reasons that we've talked about previously, and so the way we solve this is, so. We maximise by, we take the derivative of the with respect to the choice variable. Which is then the derivative of revenue. Minus the derivative of costs. And we say we use what's called the first order condition, which is to say we make this 0, and whatever the Q is that satisfies this is gonna be the profit max is gonna be the profit maximising level of Q. Subject to costs being convex and profit being concave and that's revenue being concave and all the usual things we would have. OK. But What is the derivative of revenue with respect to Q, that's how revenue changes when we change quantity, which is what we call marginal revenue. Right, cos it's how revenue changes when we change quantity. What's the derivative of costs with respect to changes in quantity? Well, it's how costs change when we change quantity, which we call marginal costs. And so We get marginal revenue, choose que so that marginal revenue equals marginal cost. We sometimes put stars on this to be like, it's the optimum level of quantity, but again, we get marginal revenue equals marginal cost. We can get it from graphs, we can get it from the equation, it'll be surprising if we got different answers, but we don't, we get the same answer. It's this. Problems No, sorry. Yes, so you can have, you you you can set up examples where marginal revenue is always bigger than marginal cost, for example, um. We won't. Um, if you do higher level economic economic theory, you normally use, um, you throw in innata conditions which guarantee that there is a unique solution to this problem. But we won't, we're just gonna say this is the answer, this this is the thing we're looking for. OK, any questions, questions, problems, otherwise. Lovely, one of these things we know lots, we know lots about, we know lots about marginal costs, because we spent all the week 7 talking about costs, right, talking about how to develop costs from production, getting from production functions to optimal levels of capital and labour, getting from there to costs of production at different levels, taking derivatives and you get marginal costs, right, so we know how to talk about costs of production and marginal costs, we've done all that. And so we need what we need to talk about is revenue, marginal revenue, and we need to look into into that a little bit more. Um, so for monopolies, this is, sorry, yeah, let's look at marginal revenue. To talk about marginal revenue, we're gonna have to first talk about demand. For monopoly uh firm level demand, so the the demand, the amount of demand that a particular firm faces. For monopolies this is fine, for monopolies this is just the market demand. But if the market demand looks like, that's the firm level demand because the monopolist is the only firm in the market. So from the monopolist perspective, they see the they see the market demand, they face the market demand, that is their firm demand. For competitive firms, it's also kind of in some ways easy because competitive firms see the market price, they can sell as much as they like at the market price, and so for them, their demand function is just right, yeah, their demand function is just the market price and nothing else. So whatever you like at that at the market price. For other types of structures, if you talk about oligopolies or monopolistic competition or anything along those lines, then we talk about residual demand, right, the demand that's left over after all the other firms have given what all the other firms are doing. Um, so for duopolies, when we talked about duopolies, there was the price, there was the, the demand that the, the amount that we would sell given the price that the other firm is selling at. So it's our residual demand. When we talk about marginal revenue for the firm, it's built from firm level demand, not from market level demand. And they're the same, obviously the same, but if they're different, they're different, um, because we talk about marginal revenue for the firm, built from the demand for that firm. Right. Can we can we can that's too many questions. Revenue, revenue is just price times quantity, right, we sell Q goods, we sell them at price P. We get P times Q. We're gonna be setting up all of our modelling so that the firm chooses quantity, quantity, and then is stuck with price. You can do this the other way around, but it's a bit, it's a bit fiddlier and a bit less neat, so we won't, um, but we're gonna set this up as the firm chooses quantity, and then they get a price for the quantity of goods that they want to sell. Which is why Q is just Q, but price is P as a function of Q. Right, because if we want to sell more, maybe we have to charge a lower price in order to do that. Right, if we're a monopolist, we have to charge a lower price to sell more. If we're in a competitive firm, we don't have to, but if we're a monopolist, we do, so this, this could change. Uh, so PE is in principle potentially a function of quantity. And so marginal revenue, as always, is the extra revenue from selling an extra good. And so, what does marginal, what does the marginal revenue at some level of quantity look like? Well it's the, it's it's, you know, it's how fast does revenue change? It's how fast revenue changes. We just talked about what revenue was. Revenue is price which might change with quantity. Times quantity. We need to be a little bit careful here, not super not like it's not hard, but we need to be a little bit careful here. We're gonna have to use one of our differentiation rules, which differentiation rule we have to use here. At least first. Product rule, right, we have to use our product rule here, it's a there's a. There's a thing that's a function of Q, and there's another thing that's a function of Q, and we take the product of those two things. So we have to use our our product rule. Our product rule says that the derivative of the product of two things is the derivative of the first part times the second part, plus the derivative of the second part times the first part. This is the product rule. We have to, we have to know it. We have to know it very often, we have to use it very often, but we in principle should know this. Um, and so we look at the derivative of the first part, derivative of P. Times the 2nd bit, which is just Q, plus. The first part, which was just a P. If you Times the derivative of the second part. Which was Some of this is easy, straightforward, nice, some of this is a little bit fiddly. That's work through some of these things. That can be nice The first part, how does price change as we change quantity. I don't have anything nice for this. um, it's just gonna have to be, it's just gonna have to be how does price change when quantity changes, and that might be that it doesn't in the case of competitive firms, but it might change for but it will for monopolists, so we'll just have to leave it and I don't have further information at this time as to what this looks like. Um, quantity is just quantity, so it's just Q. Price is just the price is just whatever the price is, so we can't do anything about that. And this is the part we can do something about the derivative of quantity with respect to quantity is just one. And so that last part at least at the very at least that last part, we get to get rid of. And so we have a few things here, right, we have marginal revenue is, is some stuff plus price. And so it's not just that marginal revenue equals price, that might be the so when we have say competitive firms, I'm getting a bit ahead of myself here, but that's OK, we have say competitive firms where price does not change when quantity changes, so when that derivative of P with respect to Q, when that's 0 for a competitive firm, marginal revenue equals price. Yeah, that's easy. But for non-competitive firms, for monopoly type firms, we get this, this distinction between marginal revenue and price, because marginal revenue is price plus this other stuff that's probably not zero. Um, We can actually go a little bit further than that, which is that assuming the law of demand holds, which it functionally always does, um, we can say that the derivative of price with respect to Q is always negative, as to, in order to sell more, we have to lower the price. Right, that's just our law of demand. Um, and so we know, we can actually say a bit more, and so a weaker thing we can say here is that this is at most price, right, because P is always, it's always P, Q is always positive, the derivative, sorry, this is always positive, but this is always negative. And so this is P plus something that's at most zero, right, that's probably negative, that's, you know, 0 or less than 0, and so this is less than P, it's equal to P only in certain circumstances. Marginal revenue. Is less than price, maybe the same. But also maybe less than. Right, where, where P assumption is basically, is basically our demand function, right, the P function is our, how much we can charge to sell Q units, so it's our inverse demand function. Mostly on any other, any questions? Questions, yes. Typically, yes, for in many cases, marginal revenue will be decreasing. We'll see some examples as well. When demand is decreasing, marginal revenue is also decreasing. For competitive firms, marginal revenue equals price, and so it's not changing, not decreasing, for non-competitive firms, monopoly type firms, um, then you will see decreasing marginal revenue in general. Alright. We can do a little bit more, which potentially the textbook does this, and I think it is worthwhile a little bit, is we can take our, take our object here and rearrange it a little bit and say that the marginal revenue is price times one plus one over the price elasticity of demand. Right, so we can bring in our, bring in our elasticity work here, and this is particularly nice because we can say things like for competitive firms, the price elasticity of demand is negative infinity, right, because if we change prices we have infinite changes in quantity salt, right, that that's what. Competitive firms are, right, if the competitive firms sell as much as they want at $10 per unit, if they try and sell it for $10 and 0.00000001 cents, then they sell infinitely many goods. So there's an infinite change in in quantity as we make very, very small changes in price. So the elasticity is negative infinity, um, which means marginal revenue is equal to price, because 1 over minus infinity is is zero. Um, for other firms, typically the elasticity, well, the demand is less than 0% because demand is downward sloping, um, and so the marginal revenue asset is less than price. Um, And as a final note here, if we have elastic demand, so that the price the the yeah the price elasticity demand is in magnitude greater than one. Um, so I think it actually should be less than -1, but it's greater than 1 in magnitude, so a very, very elastic demand, um, then margin revenue is negative, and marginal revenue being negative is very, very bad. Right, marginal revenue being negative says if I sell one more if I, if I sell one more unit. My revenue falls, right, which is typically because in order to sell one more unit, I have to reduce the price of the goods that I'm selling. So rather than selling 100 goods at $100 each, I sell 101 goods at $99 each, and that's actually less revenue. It's particularly bad because it means my revenue's gone down, and also because I'm making more stuff, my costs have gone up. And so I'm definitely in a bad place there, right? If marginal revenue is less than 0, then we can definitely do better as a firm by reducing our production, right, so if we reduce production, we both increase revenue and also reduce costs and we're very, very happy, um. But in any case, this is our this is our formula for marginal revenue, we sometimes will talk about this in the elasticity sense, often we will not, but we will not necessarily talk about it in the elasticity sense. We'll sometimes just talk about it in the, Shot a line here, yeah, yeah, that's fine. Questions, problems, concerns, yes. There's a couple of steps between here and here, there's a couple of like steps of of algebra, but it's really just sort of rearranging a few things and and poking around with the algebra. 2 minutes. OK. Questions. Lovely. We will do this for 5 minutes and now I think we'll finish up. So for generic demand functions, marginal rev the marginal revenue curve is really not obvious in any sort of, in any sort of sense, right, the marginal revenue curve is, is, is this thing here, which might be fine, but it might be not obvious, um. Uh, and in general, if you have a generic kind of demand function, you may just have to work, work out marginal revenue anew each time. Right, so if we have a demand function that looks, that looks like this, right, that is, is the minus 2/3, the price we can charge, if you want to sell units, the price we can charge is Q to the 2/3. Q 2/3, roughly speaking, quantity. Dollars per unit Here to the minus 2/3, roughly speaking it looks like this. It's kind of cut to the -1, but it's not quite that, cos it's cute though, the minus 2 that's with this kind of shape, right, it goes inwards and it does this. Marginal revenue is is not clear what this is, right, so our marginal revenue, we just have to, we just have to do it, right, we worked out just before that, well, yeah, marginal revenue is, well, it's the, Derivative in quantity of revenue. So it's the derivative in quantity of, Q times P. Which is the derivative in quantity of, Q times P. Q to the minus 2/3. Which is the derivative of. Que to the 3rd. Which is a 3rd Q to the minus 2/3, so we pull the power down and we subtract one from the power. And so in this particular instance, in this specific particular instance, um, the marginal revenue curve looks a lot like the demand curve, but it's just 1/3 as high. Right, and so our marginal revenue curve is pretty similar. But it's 1/3 as high. Some arbitrary cu. This is Q to the minus 2/3. This is a 3rd Q to the minus 2/3. Right. The point here is, this is kind of weird. Margin revenue is not necessarily related in a nice or expected way to margin to to demand. It's something. It's related to demand, certainly. But it's not gonna be clear in general how. Problems, concerns. That's our bad result, then we have a good result. And our good result is linear demand, right, so when demand is linear, then we can do a lot better and you did do this in micro one but I want to just really emphasise it, um, so if we have linear demand, then things are much, much nicer, right, so we're in now in a world. We have quantity, we have dollars per unit. If we're in a world of linear demand. Alright, A uh A over B. So when you demand things are much neater, much, much nicer, much, much neater. Because marginal revenue. Is the derivative of revenue. It's derivative of quantity times price. Price is. A minus BQ. So it's the derivative of AQ minus BQ2, just expanding this out. We apply the derivative derivative of A times Q is just A, the of B times Q2 is 2 BQ. And so what do we get, we get this the marginal revenue is again also linear. We get that the wide set is the same, we get that the slope is twice as steep. Right and so we get all those results from micro one which said that our marginal revenue, Is is if if demand is linear, if demand is linear, marginal revenue is also linear, same way intercept twice as steep slope. But that really is, right, that really is linear demand, linear demand gets us this really nice result, non-linear demand doesn't, we often work with linear demand because things are a lot easier. And if we are in that world, then we have this nice result. That we can just push through. I didn't actually have that there. OK, that's. A good spot to stop actually, any questions? Questions, concerns, issues? Fantastic, it's a good spot to stop. I've got 1 minute to go. I will give gift you a minute of your life back. If you have any questions, you can come see me now, else I will see you all in 2 days. Friday lecture. Thanks everyone.
