# Chapter One

# 1\. I Should Have Been a Statistic

We found hell in a beautiful neighborhood. In 1981, Williamsville offered the
tastiest real estate in Buffalo, New York. Leafy and friendly, its safe
streets were dotted with dainty homes filled with model citizens. Doctors,
attorneys, steel plant executives, dentists, and professional football players
lived there with their adoring wives and their 2.2 kids. Cars were new, roads
swept, possibilities endless. We’re talking about a living, breathing American
Dream. Hell was a corner lot on Paradise Road.

That’s where we lived in a two-story, four-bedroom, white wooden home with
four square pillars framing a front porch that led to the widest, greenest
lawn in Williamsville. We had a vegetable garden out back and a two-car garage
stocked with a 1962 Rolls Royce Silver Cloud, a 1980 Mercedes 450 SLC, and, in
the driveway, a sparkling new 1981 black Corvette. Everyone on Paradise Road
lived near the top of the food chain, and based on appearances, most of our
neighbors thought that we, the so-called happy, well-adjusted Goggins family,
were the tip of that spear. But glossy surfaces reflect much more than they
reveal.

They’d see us most weekday mornings, gathered in the driveway at 7 a.m. My
dad, Trunnis Goggins, wasn’t tall but he was handsome and built like a boxer.
He wore tailored suits, his smile warm and open. He looked every bit the
successful businessman on his way to work. My mother, Jackie, was seventeen
years younger, slender and beautiful, and my brother and I were clean cut,
well dressed in jeans and pastel Izod shirts, and strapped with backpacks just
like the other kids. The white kids. In our version of affluent America, each
driveway was a staging ground for nods and waves before parents and children
rode off to work and school. Neighbors saw what they wanted. Nobody probed too
deep.

Good thing. The truth was, the Goggins family had just returned home from
another all-nighter in the hood, and if Paradise Road was Hell, that meant I
lived with the Devil himself. As soon as our neighbors shut the door or turned
the corner, my father’s smile morphed into a scowl. He barked orders and went
inside to sleep another one off, but our work wasn’t done. My brother, Trunnis
Jr., and I had somewhere to be, and it was up to our sleepless mother to get
us there.

I was in first grade in 1981, and I was in a school daze, for real. Not
because the academics were hard—at least not yet—but because I couldn’t stay
awake. The teacher’s sing-song voice was my lullaby, my crossed arms on my
desk, a comfy pillow, and her sharp words—once she caught me dreaming—an
unwelcome alarm clock that wouldn’t stop blaring. Children that young are
infinite sponges. They soak up language and ideas at warp speed to establish a
fundamental foundation upon which most people build life-long skills like
reading and spelling and basic math, but because I worked nights, I couldn’t
concentrate on anything most mornings, except trying to stay awake.

Recess and PE were a whole different minefield. Out on the playground staying
lucid was the easy part. The hard part was the hiding. Couldn’t let my shirt
slip. Couldn’t wear shorts. Bruises were red flags I couldn’t show because if
I did, I knew I’d catch even more. Still, on that playground and in the
classroom I knew I was safe, for a little while at least. It was the one place
he couldn’t reach me, at least not physically. My brother went through a
similar dance in sixth grade, his first year in middle school. He had his own
wounds to hide and sleep to harvest, because once that bell rang, real life
began.

The ride from Williamsville to the Masten District in East Buffalo took about
a half an hour, but it may as well have been a world away. Like much of East
Buffalo, Masten was a mostly black working-class neighborhood in the inner
city that was rough around the edges; though, in the early 1980s, it was not
yet completely ghetto as fuck. Back then the Bethlehem Steel plant was still
humming and Buffalo was the last great American steel town. Most men in the
city, black and white, worked solid union jobs and earned a living wage, which
meant business in Masten was good. For my dad, it always had been.

By the time he was twenty years old he owned a Coca-Cola distribution
concession and four delivery routes in the Buffalo area. That’s good money for
a kid, but he had bigger dreams and an eye on the future. His future had four
wheels and a disco funk soundtrack. When a local bakery shut down, he leased
the building and built one of Buffalo’s first roller skating rinks.

Fast-forward ten years and Skateland had been relocated to a building on Ferry
Street that stretched nearly a full block in the heart of the Masten District.
He opened a bar above the rink, which he named the Vermillion Room. In the
1970s, that was the place to be in East Buffalo, and it’s where he met my
mother when she was just nineteen and he was thirty-six. It was her first time
away from home. Jackie grew up in the Catholic Church. Trunnis was the son of
a minister, and knew her language well enough to masquerade as a believer,
which appealed to her. But let’s keep it real. She was just as drunk on his
charm.

Trunnis Jr. was born in 1971. I was born in 1975, and by the time I was six
years old, the roller disco craze was at its absolute peak. Skateland rocked
every night. We’d usually get there around 5 p.m., and while my brother worked
the concession stand—popping corn, grilling hot dogs, loading the cooler, and
making pizzas—I organized the skates by size and style. Each afternoon, I
stood on a step stool to spray my stock with aerosol deodorizer and replace
the rubber stoppers. That aerosol stink would cloud all around my head and
live in my nostrils. My eyes looked permanently bloodshot. It was the only
thing I could smell for hours. But those were the distractions I had to ignore
to stay organized and on hustle. Because my dad, who worked the DJ booth, was
always watching, and if any of those skates went missing, it meant my ass.
Before the doors opened I’d polish the skate rink floor with a dust mop that
was twice my size.

![](../images/00003.jpeg)

Skateland, age six

At around 6 p.m., my mother called us to dinner in the back office. That woman
lived in a permanent state of denial, but her maternal instinct was real, and
it made a big fucking show of itself, grasping for any shred of normalcy.
Every night in that office, she’d set out two electric burners on the floor,
sit with her legs curled behind her, and prepare a full dinner—roast meat,
potatoes, green beans, and dinner rolls, while my dad did the books and made
calls.

The food was good, but even at six and seven years old I knew our “family
dinner” was a bullshit facsimile compared to what most families had. Plus, we
ate fast. There was no time to enjoy it because at 7 p.m. when the doors
opened, it was show time, and we all had to be in our places with our stations
prepped. My dad was the sheriff, and once he stepped into the DJ booth he had
us triangulated. He scanned that room like an all-seeing eye, and if you
fucked up you’d hear about it. Unless you felt it first.

The room didn’t look like much under the harsh, overhead house lights, but
once he dimmed them, the show lights bathed the rink in red and glanced off
the spinning mirror ball, conjuring a skate disco fantasy. Weekend or
weeknight, hundreds of skaters piled through that door. Most of the time they
came in as a family, paying their $3 entrance fee and half-dollar skate fee
before hitting the floor.

I rented out the skates and managed that entire station by myself. I carried
that step stool around like a crutch. Without it, the customers couldn’t even
see me. The bigger-sized skates were down below the counter, but the smaller
sizes were stored so high I’d have to scale the shelves, which always made the
customers laugh. Mom was the one and only cashier. She collected everyone’s
cover charge, and to Trunnis, money was everything. He counted the people as
they came in, calculating his take in real time so he had a rough idea of what
to expect when he counted out the register after we closed up. And it had
better all be there.

All the money was his. The rest of us never earned a cent for our sweat. In
fact, my mother was never given any money of her own. She had no bank account
or credit cards in her name. He controlled everything, and we all knew what
would happen if her cash drawer ever came up short.

None of the customers who came through our doors knew any of this, of course.
To them, Skateland was a family-owned-and-operated dream cloud. My dad spun
the fading vinyl echoes of disco and funk and the early rumbles of hip hop.
Bass bounced off the red walls, courtesy of Buffalo’s favorite son Rick James,
George Clinton’s Funkadelic, and the first tracks ever released by hip hop
innovators Run DMC. Some of the kids were speed skating. I liked to go fast
too, but we had our share of skate dancers, and that floor got funky.

For the first hour or two the parents stayed downstairs and skated, or watched
their kids spin the oval, but they would eventually leak upstairs to make
their own scene, and when enough of them made their move, Trunnis slipped out
of the DJ booth so he could join them. My dad was considered the unofficial
mayor of Masten, and he was a phony politician to the core. His customers were
his marks, and what they didn’t know was that no matter how many drinks he
poured on the house and bro hugs he shared, he didn’t give a fuck about any of
them. They were all dollar signs to him. If he poured you a drink for free, it
was because he knew you would buy two or three more.

While we had our share of all-night skates and twenty-four-hour skate
marathons, the Skateland doors typically closed at 10 p.m. That’s when my
mother, brother, and I went to work, fishing bloody tampons out of shit-filled
toilets, airing the lingering cannabis haze out of both bathrooms, scraping
bacteria-loaded gum off the rink floor, cleaning the concession kitchen, and
taking inventory. Just before midnight, we’d slog into the office, half-dead.
Our mother would tuck my brother and me beneath a blanket on the office sofa,
our heads opposite one another, as the ceiling shook with the sound of bass-
heavy funk.

Mom was still on the clock.

As soon as she stepped inside the bar, Trunnis had her working the door or
hustling downstairs like a booze mule to fetch cases of liquor from the
basement. There was always some menial task to perform and she didn’t stop
moving, while my father kept watch from his corner of the bar where he could
take in the whole scene. In those days, Rick James, a Buffalo native and one
of my father’s closest friends, stopped by whenever he was in town, parking
his Excalibur on the sidewalk out front. His car was a billboard that let the
hood know a Superfreak was in the house. He wasn’t the only celebrity that
came through. OJ Simpson was one of the NFL’s biggest stars, and he and his
Buffalo Bills teammates were regulars, as was Teddy Pendergrass and Sister
Sledge. If you don’t know the names, look them up.

Maybe if I had been older, or my father had been a good man, I might have had
some pride in being part of a cultural moment like that, but young kids aren’t
about that life. It’s almost like, no matter who our parents are and what they
do, we’re all born with a moral compass that’s properly tuned. When you’re
six, seven, or eight years old, you know what feels right and what feels way
the fuck off. And when you are born into a cyclone of terror and pain, you
know it doesn’t have to be that way, and that truth nags at you like a
splinter in your jacked up mind. You can choose to ignore it, but the dull
throbbing is always there as the days and nights bleed together into one
blurred memory.

Some moments do stick out though, and one I’m thinking of right now still
haunts me. That was the night my mom stepped into the bar before she was
expected and found my dad sweet talking a woman about ten years her junior.
Trunnis saw her watching and shrugged while my mother eyeballed him and
slugged two shots of Johnnie Walker Red to calm her nerves. He noticed her
reaction and didn’t like it one damn bit.

She knew how things were. That Trunnis ran prostitutes across the border to
Fort Erie in Canada. A summer cottage belonging to the president of one of
Buffalo’s biggest banks doubled as his pop-up brothel. He introduced Buffalo
bankers to his girls whenever he needed a longer line of credit, and those
loans always came through. My mom knew the young woman she was watching was
one of the girls in his stable. She’d seen her before. Once, she walked in on
them fucking on the Skateland office sofa, where she tucked her children in
damn near every night. When she found them together, the woman smiled at her.
Trunnis shrugged. No, my mom wasn’t clueless, but seeing it with her own eyes
always burned.

Around midnight, my mother drove with one of our security guards to make a
bank deposit. He begged her to leave my father. He told her to leave that very
night. Maybe he knew what was coming. She did too, but she couldn’t run
because she had no independent means whatsoever, and she wasn’t going to leave
us in his hands. Plus, she had no rights to community property because Trunnis
had always refused to marry her, which was a riddle she was only then starting
to solve. My mother came from a solid, middle class family, and had always
been the virtuous type. He resented that, treated his hookers better than the
mother of his sons, and as a result he had her trapped. She was 100 percent
dependent, and if she wanted to leave, she’d have to walk with nothing at all.

My brother and I never slept well at Skateland. The ceiling shook too much
because the office was directly below the dance floor. When my mother walked
in that night I was already awake. She smiled, but I noticed the tears in her
eyes and remember smelling the scotch on her breath when she scooped me up in
her arms as tenderly as she could. My father trailed in after her, sloppy and
annoyed. He pulled a pistol from beneath the cushion where I slept (yes, you
read that right, there was a loaded gun under the cushion on which I slept at
six years old!), flashed it at me, and smiled before concealing it beneath his
pant leg in an ankle holster. In his other hand were two brown paper shopping
bags filled with nearly $10,000 in cash. So far it was a typical night.

My parents didn’t speak on the drive home, though the tension between them
simmered. My mom pulled into the driveway on Paradise Road just before 6 a.m.,
a little early by our standards. Trunnis stumbled from the car, disabled the
alarm, dropped the cash on the kitchen table, and went upstairs. We followed
him, and she tucked us both into our beds, kissed me on the forehead, and
turned out the light before slipping into the master suite where she found him
waiting, stroking his leather belt. Trunnis didn’t appreciate being glared at
by my mom, especially in public.

“This belt came all the way from Texas just to whip you,” he said, calmly.
Then he started swinging it, buckle first. Sometimes my mother fought back,
and she did that night. She threw a marble candlestick at his head. He ducked
and it thudded the wall. She ran into the bathroom, locked the door, and
cowered on the toilet. He kicked the door down and backhanded her hard. Her
head slammed into the wall. She was barely conscious when he grabbed a fistful
of her hair and dragged her down the hall.

By then my brother and I had heard the violence, and we watched him drag her
all the way down the stairs to the first floor, then crouch over her with the
belt in his hand. She was bleeding from the temple and the lip, and the sight
of her blood lit a fuse in me. In that moment my hatred overcame my fear. I
ran downstairs and jumped on his back, slammed my tiny fists into his back,
and scratched at his eyes. I’d caught him off guard and he fell to one knee. I
wailed on him.

“Don’t hit my mom!” I yelled. He tossed me to the ground, stalked toward me,
belt in hand, then turned toward my mother.

“You’re raising a gangster,” he said, half-smiling.

I curled into a ball when he started swinging his belt at me. I could feel
bruises rise on my back as my mom crawled toward the control pad near the
front door. She pressed the panic button and the house exploded in alarm. He
froze, looked toward the ceiling, mopped his brow with his sleeve, took a deep
breath, looped and buckled his belt, and went upstairs to wash off all that
evil and hate. Police were on their way, and he knew it.

My mother’s relief was short-lived. When the cops arrived, Trunnis met them at
the door. They looked over his shoulder toward my mom, who stood several paces
behind him, her face swollen and caked with dried blood. But those were
different days. There was no #metoo back then. That shit didn’t exist, and
they ignored her. Trunnis told them it was all a whole lot of nothing. Just
some necessary domestic discipline.

“Look at this house. Does it look like I mistreat my wife?” He asked. “I give
her mink coats, diamond rings, I bust my ass to give her everything she wants,
and she throws a marble candlestick at my head. She’s spoiled.”

The police chuckled along with my father as he walked them to their car. They
left without interviewing her. He didn’t hit her again that morning. He didn’t
have to. The psychological damage was done. From that point on it was clear to
us that as far as Trunnis and the law were concerned it was open season, and
we were the hunted.

Over the next year, our schedule didn’t change much and the beatings
continued, while my mother tried to paper over the darkness with swatches of
light. She knew I wanted to be a Scout, so she signed me up for a local troop.
I still remember putting on that navy blue Cub Scout button down one Saturday.
I felt proud wearing a uniform and knowing at least for a few hours I could
pretend that I was a normal kid. My mom smiled as we headed for the door. My
pride, her smile, wasn’t just because of the damn Cub Scouts. They rose up
from a deeper place. We were taking action to find something positive for
ourselves in a bleak situation. It was proof that we mattered, and that we
weren’t completely powerless.

That’s when my father came home from the Vermillion Room.

“Where you two going?” He glared at me. I stared at the floor. My mother
cleared her throat.

“I’m taking David to his first Cub Scout meeting,” she said, softly.

“The hell you are!” I looked up, and he laughed as my eyes welled up with
tears. “We’re going to the track.”

Within the hour we’d arrived at Batavia Downs, an old-school harness horse
race track, the type where jockeys ride behind the horses in lightweight
buggies. My dad grabbed a racing form as soon we stepped through the gate. For
hours, the three of us watched him place bet after bet, chain smoke, drink
scotch, and raise holy hell as every pony he bet on finished out of the money.
With my dad raging at the gambling gods and acting a fool, I tried to make
myself as small as possible whenever people walked by, but I still stuck out.
I was the only kid in the stands dressed like a Cub Scout. I was probably the
only black Cub Scout they’d ever seen, and my uniform was a lie. I was a
pretender.

Trunnis lost thousands of dollars that day, and he wouldn’t shut up about it
on the drive home, his raspy throat raw from nicotine. My brother and I were
in the cramped back seat and whenever he spat out the window, his phlegm
boomeranged into my face. Each drop of his nasty saliva on my skin burned like
venom and intensified my hate. I’d long since learned that the best way to
avoid a beat down was to make myself as invisible as possible, avert my eyes,
float outside my body, and hope to go unnoticed. It was a practice we’d all
honed over the years, but I was done with that shit. I would no longer hide
from the Devil. That afternoon as he veered onto the highway and headed home,
he continued to rave on, and I mad-dogged him from the back seat. Have you
ever heard the phrase, “Faith Over Fear”? For me it was Hate Over Fear.

He caught my eyes in the rearview mirror.

“You got something to say?!”

“We shouldn’t have gone to the track anyway,” I said.

My brother turned and stared at me like I’d lost my damn mind. My mother
squirmed in her seat.

“Say that one more time.” His words came slow, dripping with dread. I didn’t
say a word, so he started reaching behind the seat trying to smack me. But I
was so small, it was easy to hide. The car veered left and right as he was
half-turned in my direction, punching air. He’d barely touched me, which only
stoked his fire. We drove in silence until he caught his breath. “When we get
home, you’re gonna take your clothes off,” he said.

That’s what he’d say when he was ready to bestow a serious beat down, and
there was no avoiding it. I did what I was told. I went into my bedroom and
took off my clothes, walked down the hall to his room, closed the door behind
me, turned the lights off, then laid across the corner of the bed with my legs
dangling, my torso stretched out in front of me, and my ass exposed. That was
the protocol, and he’d designed it for maximum psychological and physical
pain.

The beatings were often brutal, but the anticipation was the worst part. I
couldn’t see the door behind me, and he’d take his time, letting my dread
build. When I heard him open the door, my panic spiked. Even then the room was
so dark I couldn’t see much with my peripheral vision, and couldn’t prepare
for the first smack until his belt hit my skin. It was never just two or three
lickings either. There was no particular count, so we never knew when or if he
was gonna stop.

This beating lasted minutes upon minutes. He started on my butt, but the sting
was so bad I blocked it with my hands, so he moved down and started whipping
my thighs. When I dropped my hands to my thighs he swung at my lower back. He
belted me dozens of times, and was breathless, coughing and slick with sweat
by the time it was over. I was breathing heavy too, but I wasn’t crying. His
evil was too real and my hate gave me courage. I refused to give that
motherfucker the satisfaction. I just stood up, looked the Devil in his eye,
limped to my room, and stood in front of a mirror. I was covered in welts from
my neck to the crease at the knees. I didn’t go to school for several days.

When you’re getting beat consistently, hope evaporates. You stifle your
emotions, but your trauma off-gasses in unconscious ways. After countless
beatings she endured and witnessed, this particular beat down left my mother
in a constant fog, a shell of the woman I remembered from a few years before.
She was distracted and vacant most of the time, except when he called her
name. Then she’d hop-to like she was his slave. I didn’t know until years
later that she was considering suicide.

My brother and I took our pain out on each other. We’d sit or stand across
from one another and he would throw punches as hard as he could at me. It
usually started out as a game, but he was four years older, much stronger, and
he connected with all his power. Whenever I’d fall, I’d get up and he’d hit me
again, as hard as he could, yelling like a martial arts warrior at the top of
his lungs, his face twisted with rage.

“You’re not hurting me! Is that all you fucking have?” I’d shout back. I
wanted him to know that I could take more pain than he could ever deliver, but
when it was time to fall asleep and there were no more battles to fight, no
place to hide, I wet the bed. Nearly every night.

My mother’s every day was a lesson in survival. She was told she was worthless
so often she started to believe it. Everything she did was an effort to
appease him so he wouldn’t beat her sons or whip her ass, but there were
invisible trip wires in her world and sometimes she never knew when or how she
set them off until after he slapped the shit out of her. Other times she knew
she teed herself up for a vicious beat down.

One day I came home early from school with a nasty earache and laid down on my
mother’s side of their bed, my left ear throbbing in excruciating pain. With
each throb my hate spiked. I knew I wouldn’t be going to the doctor because my
father didn’t approve of spending his money on doctors or dentists. We didn’t
have health insurance, a pediatrician, or a dentist. If we got injured or
sick, we were told to shake it off because he wasn’t down to pay for anything
that didn’t directly benefit Trunnis Goggins. Our health didn’t meet that
standard, and that pissed me the fuck off.

After about a half hour, my mother came upstairs to check on me and when I
rolled onto my back she could see blood dribbling down the side of my neck and
smeared all over the pillow.

“That’s it,” she said, “come with me.”

She got me out of bed, dressed me, and helped me to her car, but before she
could start the engine, my dad chased us down.

“Where you think you’re going?!”

“The emergency room,” she said as she turned the ignition. He reached for the
handle but she peeled out first, leaving him in her dust. Furious, he stomped
inside, slammed the door, and called out to my brother.

“Son, get me a Johnnie Walker!” Trunnis Jr. brought over a bottle of Red Label
and a glass from the wet bar. He poured and poured and watched my dad down
shot after shot. Each one fueled an inferno. “You and David need to be
strong,” he raved. “I’m not raising a bunch of faggots! And that’s what you’ll
be if you go to the doctor every time you get a little boo boo, understand?”
My brother nodded, petrified. “Your last name is Goggins, and we shake it
off!”

According to the doctor we saw that night, my mother got me to the ER just in
time. My ear infection was so bad that if we’d waited any longer, I would have
lost my hearing in my left ear for life. She risked her ass to save mine and
we both knew she’d pay for it. We drove home in eerie silence.

My dad was still stewing at the kitchen table by the time we turned onto
Paradise Road, and my brother was still pouring him shots. Trunnis Jr. feared
our father, but he also worshipped the man and was under his spell. As the
first born son he was treated better. Trunnis would still lash out at him, but
in his warped mind, Trunnis Jr. was his prince. “When you grow up I’m gonna
want to see you be the man of your house,” Trunnis told him. “And you’re gonna
see me be a man tonight.”

Moments after we walked through the front door, Trunnis beat our mother
senseless, but my brother couldn’t watch. Whenever the beatings exploded like
a thunderstorm overhead, he’d wait them out in his room. He ignored the
darkness because the truth was way too heavy for him to carry. I always paid
close fucking attention.

During the summers, there was no midweek respite from Trunnis, but my brother
and I learned to hop on our bikes and stay far away for as long as we could.
One day, I came home for lunch and entered the house through the garage like
normal. My father usually slept deep into the afternoon, so I figured the
coast was clear. I was wrong. My father was paranoid. He did enough shady
deals to attract some enemies, and he’d set the alarm after we left the house.

When I opened the door, sirens screamed and my stomach dropped. I froze,
backed up against the wall, and listened for footsteps. I heard the stairs
creak and knew I was fucked. He came downstairs in his brown terrycloth robe,
pistol in hand, and crossed from the dining room into the living room, his gun
out front. I could see the barrel come around the corner slowly.

As soon as he cleared the corner he could see me standing just twenty feet
away, but he didn’t drop his weapon. He aimed it right between my eyes. I
stared straight at him, blank as possible, my feet anchored to the floor
boards. There was no one else in the house, and part of me expected him to
pull the trigger, but by this time in my life I no longer cared if I lived or
died. I was an exhausted eight-year-old kid, plain old fucking tired of being
terrified of my father, and I was sick of Skateland too. After a minute or two
he lowered his weapon and went back upstairs.

By now it was becoming clear that someone was going to die on Paradise Road.
My mother knew where Trunnis kept his .38. Some days she timed and followed
him—envisioned how it would play out. They’d take separate cars to Skateland,
she’d grab his gun from beneath the office sofa cushions before he could get
there, bring us home early, put us to bed, and wait for him by the front door
with his gun in hand. When he pulled up, she’d step out the front door and
murder him in his driveway—leave his body for the milkman to find. My uncles,
her brothers, talked her out of it, but they agreed she needed to do something
drastic or she’d be the one lying dead.

It was an old neighbor who showed her a way. Betty used to live across the
street from us and after she moved they stayed in touch. Betty was twenty
years older than my mom and had the wisdom to match. She encouraged my mother
to plan her escape weeks in advance. The first step was getting a credit card
in her name. That meant she had to re-earn Trunnis’ trust because she needed
him to cosign. Betty also reminded my mother to keep their friendship a
secret.

For a few weeks Jackie played Trunnis, treated him like she did when she was a
nineteen-year-old beauty with stars in her eyes. She made him believe she
worshipped him again, and when she slipped a credit card application in front
of him, he said he’d be happy to score her a little buying power. When the
card arrived in the mail, my mother felt its hard plastic edges through the
envelope as relief saturated her mind. She held it at arms length and admired
it. It glowed like a golden ticket.

A few days later she heard my father talking shit about her on the phone to
one of his friends, while he was having breakfast with my brother and me at
the kitchen table. That did it. She walked over to the table and said, “I’m
leaving your father. You two can stay or you can come with me.”

My dad was stunned silent and so was my brother, but I shot out of that chair
like it was on fire, grabbed a few black garbage bags, and went upstairs to
start packing. My brother eventually started gathering his things too. Before
we left, the four of us had one last pow wow at that kitchen table. Trunnis
glared at my mother, filled with shock and contempt.

“You have nothing and you are nothing without me,” he said. “You’re
uneducated, you don’t have any money or prospects.
.

Challenge #1

My bad cards arrived early and stuck around a while, but everyone gets
challenged in life at some point. What was your bad hand? What kind of
bullshit did you contend with growing up? Were you beaten? Abused? Bullied?
Did you ever feel insecure? Maybe your limiting factor is that you grew up so
supported and comfortable, you never pushed yourself?

What are the current factors limiting your growth and success? Is someone
standing in your way at work or school? Are you underappreciated and
overlooked for opportunities? What are the long odds you’re up against right
now? Are you standing in your own way?

Break out your journal—if you don’t have one, buy one, or start one on your
laptop, tablet, or in the notes app on your smart phone—and write them all out
in minute detail. Don’t be bland with this assignment. I showed you every
piece of my dirty laundry. If you were hurt or are still in harm’s way, tell
the story in full. Give your pain shape. Absorb its power, because you are
about to flip that shit.

You will use your story, this list of excuses, these very good reasons why you
shouldn’t amount to a damn thing, to fuel your ultimate success. Sounds fun
right? Yeah, it won’t be. But don’t worry about that yet. We’ll get there. For
now, just take inventory.

Once you have your list, share it with whoever you want. For some, it may mean
logging onto social media, posting a picture, and writing out a few lines
about how your own past or present circumstances challenge you to the depth of
your soul. If that’s you, use the hashtags #badhand #canthurtme. Otherwise,
acknowledge and accept it privately. Whatever works for you. I know it’s hard,
but this act alone will begin to empower you to overcome.
