SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Are Hi, good afternoon, everyone. Thank you for being here, even though it's another glorious afternoon in Canberra, Blue sky, sunshine. So I'll try to make it as exciting, as good an outside option as possible. Um, thank you also for those of you who have completed the assignment and submitted it, we will try to get it back to you by the end of next week with marks and some basic comments. Um, we will then also upload. I call them skeleton answers because they're not model answers in the sense that this is exactly how you have to answer them because sometimes there's a little bit of leeway, it gives you an idea of the kind of things that we're looking for, especially for the questions that are a little bit more open ended, um, yeah. So together with the, the solutions, skeleton answers, together with the comments, um, hopefully give you enough feedback so that you can learn from, Uh, what you did from that assignment, I mean that's a big part of the assignments is, is to give you an opportunity to learn, delve more deeply into the subject matter, um, but then if there's still any remaining questions, of course feel free to come to us, uh, your tutor or me and or me, um, for further discussion. Um, moreover, the discussion forum online on Wattle is very quiet, so please do take advantage of that. Um, like I said, it can be a very useful. Tool to exchange ideas, iron out any kind of wrinkles that you may have, I can guarantee that if you have a question, there's gonna be someone else in a cohort of 330 that has the same question, um, and it, it usually, From past experience, I've uh noticed that it's um that it's a useful resource for the vast majority of, of you. You may have also figured out by now, I did mention this on wattle, but just to uh remind you again that the date and time for the mid-semester exam has been finalised. Remember this is out of our hands, it's coordinated by the examinations office which is centralised. Make sure you make yourself available for that time and day. I will provide a little bit further information about the mid-semester exam, what to expect and what it's going to look like, uh, sometime during the two week break. I will also provide you with some with a kind of mock exam for you to practise with some questions and some answers again to prepare you. Uh, optimally for the mid-semester exam, but bottom line, it's gonna be 1 hour long, uh, the majority of it, so if you think about how you're gonna allocate your time, you should probably allocate about 40 minutes or so to um some multiple choice questions. And then there's going to be one question for the remainder. 15 or 20 minutes that remain in that hour, um, it's going to be a a question similar in style to the assignment and or um uh the kind of questions that you've been encountered on the problem sets um. That is going to roughly reflect the final exam as well. However, the final exam only has about, because the final exam is 3 hours long, the final exam only has about 1/5 of multiple choice questions, and the remainder, you know, 80% of it is sort of free form questions, right? um. Anyway, you'll you'll get an idea of the kind of multiple choice questions um from the practise exam that I will upload. So there should be plenty of opportunity for you to, um, to understand what's expected of you beforehand, again, if anything is unclear, then please contact us. Any questions? Cool. Great. Then I would like to continue from where we left off. We are now on our reasonably large chapter on economic growth. Um, sometimes we refer to this as the long run chapter to distinguish it from what? Yes. The business cycles, right, so how would, how can we think about the difference between long run growth and business cycles? Um, Well, at least we, well, often we pretend as though it was growing at a steady rate, right, um, and we're not concerned with the actual fluctuations that we observe around the steady state. So yeah, it's the, the, the long run is in many ways a counterfactual, right, um, it's, it's how we imagine the economy would operate if it wasn't for the peaks and valleys that we do observe in the real data, right? Um, but to the extent that we care about living standards, which is what is a long run issue, how do countries end up becoming rich, um, or possibly not, uh, we don't want to be burdened down, certainly not technically, Analytically and probably also not pedagogically, we don't want to be burdened down with having to control uh with having to deal with business cycles on top of the issue of uh long run economic growth. OK, so where we left off was to start thinking a little bit more rigorously about how we might approach this problem and again we are not going to be able to answer all of the all of the questions surrounding long run economic growth, by no means, in fact, you'll probably feel a little bit dissatisfied by the whole exercise in the end. But a big part of what we're trying to do is not just start gaining uh gaining some insight into long run economic growth but also develop um good practise how to approach these kinds of problems as a macroeconomist, in other words, to, to teach you, uh, the, the technical skills that come with this. And so the question that we ask is why are some countries rich and others poor, and we identified one key observation. not the only one by no means, right? So there are other observations that we can come across or that we can make, but one observation is that typically rich countries have more physical capital or are endowed with more physical capital than poor countries. And so the question that follows from this simple observation is, are the different endowments and physical capital sufficient to explain the differences in living standards across countries? At a point in time, right? This is not yet a story of economic growth. Growth is a dynamic process, by definition. This is just a simple question to. To figure out whether the differences in living standards can be can be attributed to differences in capital endowments because, Depending on how that, how the answer to that question evolves or what the answer to that question is, we, We know where to look or start looking at least when we want to think about economic growth, OK? So, we're going to go about this in a very simple way by adopting an approach that is as close. To what we know from microeconomics as possible, where we assume a simple production function and we imagine that a simple production function, That characterises an individual firm can also be used to characterise how an entire economy operates. Big, big assumption, a hairy assumption, some economists would dismiss the entire exercise right from the word go because they don't like this idea of simply assuming an aggregate production function, um, but it is a common practise nonetheless, and so we will adopt that assumption as well. Now our production function is going to look familiar from uh microeconomics in particular, we're gonna have two production factors, labour and physical capital. Those are the primary production factors, and then we've got another production factor, the secondary production factor which we call, um, uh, which we call TFP total factor productivity A. OK, so it's. The combination of the primary production factors. Right, it's the primary production factors. Somehow taken together with all the other secondary factors that, you know, imagine a factory, and we don't quite know what happens in the factory, but something useful happens in the factory because somewhere at the other end of the factory out popped all the products that the factory is responsible for producing. Um, and so. We will spend some time thinking about the primary factors, but we will see that the secondary factors actually are going to be really important in order to understand living standards and economic growth, um. So we need, since the the production function is so central, we need to make sure that we really understand the production function properly and the assumptions that go into the production function. In particular, we're going to choose a simple form that we've seen before, which is the the Cobb Douglas production function. We don't need to per se assume a Cobb Douglas production function. We could use or or assume other production functions as well, as long as there are certain properties. Associated with that production function and one of the important properties that we require is diminishing returns to the individual production factors, the primary production factors. Now what does it mean to have a diminishing return to an individual production factor? Or sometimes we refer to it also as diminishing marginal product in either labour or capital. What does it mean to have a diminishing marginal product in capital, for example. Yes. Yep, that sounds good, except that we're not. Talking about utility here, but output, right? But otherwise, yes, if you have very little capital to begin with and you add a unit of capital, you're going to get a lot of bang for your buck, then that extra unit of capital is going to be very useful, it's going to produce a lot of extra output. If you already have a lot of capital, then an extra unit of capital is not going to be that useful. Yes, it will produce more output, but not as much additional output as that unit of capital would deliver. If you had a very small capital stock to begin with, and we can make exactly the same argument for labour if you've got only a few workers and you add another worker, the additional output that additional worker is going to produce is going to be large. However, if you've already got a large employment, a large or high level of employment and you add another worker, then presumably the additional output by that additional worker is not going to be that big. Um, and what that does is when we plot our production function, in this case it's a three dimensional production function because we have labour on one axis and the amount of capital on the other axis is, and then obviously output on the Y axis, so this production function somehow combines these two primary production factors, labour and capital to produce output. It's going to be concave, right? So if I were to take a slice anywhere along here or slice anywhere along here, I would see that the production function is concave. The more capital I choose, the smaller the additional output is going to be, and similarly for labour. So that's a key property of the production function that we're going to need for the purposes of this analysis. It's mostly seen as being quite a reasonable assumption, though we could also come up with. With exceptions, right? Um, so a standard. Way of explaining this is imagine you've got a paddock here, and you've got 10 workers on the paddock, you know, this is not talking about agriculture. Um, add a tractor to the paddock and you're gonna be able to produce a lot of extra output. Add a second tractor and you're probably still going to add a lot of output. If you've already got 10 tractors on the paddock, adding the 11th tractor is probably not terribly useful. And likewise, if you've got 10 tractors on the paddock but no workers, add a 1 worker and they're gonna be able to be very productive. Add a second worker, they too are going to be very productive. The 10th worker presumably is not that productive anymore. And you could even make arguments where if you had too many, the marginal product might even become negative as people start stepping on each other's feet or the tractors get in each other's way or whatever. But there are There are exceptions and there are other industries. Where we May not always have diminishing marginal product, at least not. At least not over a range that we really care about. And there's a little bit about that later on uh in this set of slides. There's also another, Feature of the production function that we need to clearly distinguish between the diminishing marginal products, Property, and that is. The returns to scale. OK, so we've just talked about diminishing marginal product. So there's diminishing margin of product in labour and there's diminishing margin of product and capital. However, this production function has constant returns to scale. Now what does that mean? And is it a contradiction if I say that the production function has diminishing marginal product in capital or labour, but at the same time it has constant returns to scale. I'm just emphasising this because I've seen. Mistake made. Numerous times in the past and I want to make sure that. You don't make that as well. Any idea? Well, ask yourself, so when we. When we look at the marginal products, what is the question that we're essentially asking? It's just sort of a a a rephrasing of what you said before. How, how, how would I have, what do I have to do in order to determine whether a production function has a high or low marginal product? Or At a certain point, we have a high or low marginal product. What am I, what is the question I'm essentially asking? Yes. The difference between what? Yeah. I put one point, I'll put the next point. OK, so what am I doing? I, I'm asking how much additional output do I get? If I vary the amount of capital. And then there's a an important addition that I have to make, holding all the other production factors constant, right, that's the key issue. So, holding everything else constant, how much additional output do I get if I increase the amount of capital? That's going to tell me what the marginal product of capital is. Alternatively, I might ask, how much additional output am I going to get if I increase the amount of labour. Holding everything else constant, in particular, holding the amount of capital constant, but everything else as well. OK, so this is a partial concept. Change one production factor and see what happens to output. And this production function indeed has that property. Now, what is constant returns to scale? Ask Or what is the question that we're asking if we are trying to determine what the returns to scale of a production function are? Remember? You did do this in microeconomics. Yes, no. Anyone? Well, the clue, yes. Exactly, so the, the key difference here is what happens when we change all the production factors at once, not holding the other production factors constant, but what happens if we increase all the production factors, the primary production factors at once, holding the rest constant, what happens to output? It's a different question, right, because we're not holding everything else constant, we're changing everything by the same amount. So for example, if we are doubling all the inputs, if we're doubling all the production factors. What is gonna happen to output? If we double labour and capital, are we going to get double output? If so, we've got constant returns to scale. If we end up with more outputs, more than double. We have increasing returns to scale, and if after doubling labour and capital, we end up with less than. 2 times output, then we've got decreasing returns to scale, right, and constant returns to scale is totally consistent or compatible with having a diminishing marginal product of either labour or capital because, diminishing margin of product holds the other production factor constant, whereas with constant returns to scale, you're increasing all the production factors at the same time, the primary production factors. Is that clear? OK, cool. So. Um, So generically we're gonna have a production function that looks something like this. We've got output Y, we've got these time subscripts T, um, not so important right now, will become important later on when we have a dynamic model where we're going to change the variables over time. So the T measures something at a in a specific period in period T. So Y is the standard variable that we use to denote output. And note that given our national income accounting output in theory, in theory, sometimes it doesn't, should always be the same as total income, total value added, and so on, but so we can call it output, we can call it income, we could call it GDP, whatever. Uh, why is output A is uh the index of secondary factors which we typically just call total factor productivity TFP, right? This here is typically just TFP. Can you see this? Sorry. It's not very good. And that's multiplied by. And that's multiplied by uh a production function that has K and L as inputs. Note again that K stands for the capital stock, in other words, the quantity of capital, says nothing about the quality and likewise labour L stands for the quantity of labour, total amount of labour employed, it says nothing about the quality of labour. Very abstract. OK, so despite being able to use a range of different production functions, we actually typically do use the Cobb-Douglas production function because we find it very easy to work with normally, and the production the Cobb Douglas production function looks something like this, uh, A, again, the TFP parameter times capital to the power of alpha times L to the power of 1 minus alpha, right. Alpha is a so-called proportionality factor on capital. Clearly, alpha has to be between 0 and 1, so that's alpha plus 1 minus alpha is equal to 1, OK? Um, what does the alpha do? Well, it basically tells you how important that production factor is in the production function. I mean, imagine if alpha were equal to one. Then Capital does all the work along with the TFP parameter A and L becomes useless, right, because the power of zero is gonna be just equal to 1. Alternatively, if alpha is equal to 0, then the production function only depends on labour and capital would drop out, um, and if alpha is strictly between 0 and 1, then it's gonna be some combination and how important capital is is gonna depend on alpha. Alright, everyone clear about that? Alright, um, so here again, we've got uh. This is our production function, but rather than having it in 3D, this is what happens when you basically slice it that way, and I'm just looking at what the production function looks like along one of these lines, right? Just take slicing it that way means I'm holding labour constant, right? So I hold labour constant, um, and given that we're interested in uh per capita terms, I can also just divide through everything by L, the number of workers, so that I've got per worker, um, um, quantities, um, the the the properties of the production function remain the same whether I divide it through by L or not, that doesn't really matter. Um, and I get this concave shape of the production function, which of course is, is precisely what we want, right? Um, So you can see that if you increase the amount of capital over here, you're gonna get a lot of increase in your output, if you've already got a lot of capital and you increase the capital stock, you're not going to get that much increase in output. OK, and this is true in a, in a per-worker context as well. So this is what we refer to as diminishing returns or diminishing marginal product. Sometimes the language can get a little bit confusing or ambiguous, so it's good to understand what's going on so you don't get confused by the language. Everyone clear about that? OK. Now, what happens? If we alter our parameter A, that is the secondary production factor or TFP total factor productivity. A is just, A multiplicator, it's just a factor that multiplies the production fact uh the production function that includes K and L as inputs, um, and so obviously the higher is A, the higher, or the more output you can produce for any given level of capital and labour, right, it just pushes the production function up. So that's it. We've got a family of production functions. The higher is a, the higher the location of that production function. And so you can see straight away that if you want to increase output per worker, because this is what this production function shows, um, having a higher A, a higher TFP is really useful because you're gonna be able to produce more output per person for any given level of capital and labour or for any given capital labour ratio, yes. Yes, we will talk about a more at um, yes, it is a measure of productivity, we'll, we'll have more to say about this in a moment, but you're right, absolutely. OK. Again, any anything unclear, please let me know. Um, So, having this in place allows us to think a little bit about why some countries are rich and some countries are poor, because remember our starting question was, well, can the differences in capital stock explain the differences in living standards? And so we might ask ourselves, OK, we've got a production function here. Is it simply the case that um a poor country in Africa, say Burundi is down over here because it has very little capital per person and a rich country like Australia is over here because it has a lot of capital per person. Is that all there is to explaining differences in output per person, or is there more going on? Is the difference in capital per person not going to be enough to explain the differences in output per person? Now how do we pursue this um more rigorously? Well, Let's go with the following. Let's Use a production function and, Two specific values for alpha, and 1 minus alpha, of course, um. There's good reason to use something that's close to 1/3. You're gonna have to just accept it from me for the moment, we could work this through in a little bit more detail with a few lines of algebra, which I don't want to do right now. But bottom line, this cords, if you remember. What is the 1/3, 2/3, does that, do you remember when we encountered. Those numbers 1/3, 2/3, we're doing measurement. Yeah, so, so the income shares right of total exactly, so how much of total output or total income accrues to labour and how much accrues to capital, and that's indeed you can show algebraically that the exponent alpha is equal to the capital income share, and the exponent 1 minus alpha, therefore is the labour income share. And because we've got data on that for the entire economy, we tend to choose values that are, About there, about 1/3, 2/3, right? Um, but OK, I don't want to dwell on that, um, further, so let's just stick with this, and now the question is, given that we've got a production function, would we be able to explain the differences in living standards just by varying the amount of capital. According to what the countries have, right, some countries have a lot of capital, other countries have not so much capital. Can we explain the differences in output that way? So let's. Do the following. Again, this is a counterfactual, it's a thought experiment. In order to really test whether it's just capital, That explains the differences in output, again we're we're we're trying to, Develop a Her rigorous way of testing this. We have to assume that everything else is constant. The only thing that we want to vary is capital. And then if all, if all we vary is capital and that's able to explain the differences in output, then, then we've answered our question, right? So let's assume that A is the same. Across all countries. Let's assume that the TFP parameter is is identical across all countries and for simplicity, let's just, set it equal to one, so we don't have to worry about it anymore. Now that may straight away sound like, Hairy assumption, but remember we're just trying to do a simple, quantitative exercise at the moment. So, If this is the same here, right, then we can just, and we can ultimately divide our output function through by L, so we're looking at per capita uh values, then. All we need to do is look at differences in capital per person and uh and consider. Um, whether that's going to suffice to explain the differences in output. So this is what we did in this table over here, and you will notice that this is not in the textbook, not much of this is in the textbook, which is why there are a couple of other chapters from the, from the other textbook because unfortunately the, the Holden. Uh, well, for Stevenson textbook, I think it is very weak on economic growth. Suppose we collect data on capital per person across countries. It's not easy to do that, but we can get reasonable assumption or reasonable measures by basically looking at investment, how much countries have invested in, in, in capital per person. And we relate their capital stocks to the US. This comes from the Jones textbook and the Jones textbook is quite US centric as I've said before, so everything is relative to the US. So the way to read this is that obviously US um uh capital per person. Is, is just, uh, you know, relative to itself, gives you a ratio of 1. Switzerland has 30% higher capital per person than the US does. That's why it's 1.3%. Japan only has 93% of capital per person, relative to the US. China has uh. What is it, can I, uh, China has 27.6% of the US's capital per person, and Burundi has less than 1% of the US's capital per person, OK. So the US has 200 times more capital per person than Burundi does. According to our Our uh measurements estimates. So, clearly a lot of variation in output per person. And so our question is, does this explain the differences in living standards? In other words, output per person? Well, how would we find out? Well, what does our production function say? Our production function says that output per person should be equal to K to the power of 1/3. That's the production function, remember we're assuming that A, the TFP parameter is, equal to one for every country. Buy some. So all we have to do now is take these numbers here and raise them to the power of 1/3, and then this is the predicted output, that's what the model tells us, output should be for each of these countries. In Switzerland, output should be 9.4% higher than in the US. Japanese output should be 97.6% of the US's GDP and Burundi's GDP should be 17.3% of the US's GDP. And now we can compare this to the actual data, namely what do we observe output per person, GDP per person does. So this is data, this is data, this is what the model predicts. And obviously, if the model is good at predicting the data, then these two columns should be very similar. What do you conclude? Yeah, the US always will be, um. It's not too bad yeah. It gets pretty bad, right? It gets pretty bad. So I mean, yeah, down here, for example, right, we observe Burundi's GDP per capita be 1.5% of the US's, and yet our model tells us that given the capital per person that we observe, output per person in Burundi should be 17.3% of the US's GDP. Um, So, would we call that a good fit of the model? Probably not. So does that mean that capital explains nothing? No, it doesn't mean that. Capital explains something because the more capital you have and the more output you produce, yes. But it's not super good at actually matching the data. Which means that Something else must be going on, right? We, and the question is, what is that something else? How and and so you can see why whilst this was in some ways a silly counterfactual, it helps us think about where we need to look, what we need to do, so a lot of. A lot of scientific analysis is running into brick walls and hurting your head along the way and saying, OK, this is not the right path to go down, I need to go somewhere else. That's why we all have bruises on our heads, yeah. No, well, OK, now, so that's, so that's a good point. So, so first of all, we can see that um. That observed output does not match predicted output very well, but as you pointed out, it gets much worse the farther down you go, right? I mean, even without looking, even. Without doing the comparison to the actual data. You can see over here that observed capital per person. Even though it's only 0.5% of the US should nonetheless predict 17% of US GDP. Why Why do you get Such a large number over here when capital per person is so little over here. And yet we've got a lot of capital per person over here and we don't seem to get that much additional output. What is this a reflection of? That's just the diminishing marginal product of capital at work, right? If you don't have a lot of capital. That little capital can actually deliver quite a lot. If you've already got a lot of capital. The additional units of capital are not going to predict uh are not gonna produce that much. You still get some bang for your buck, but not that much. OK, great. Everyone on board? Cool. So, So we've seen here that. This simple model is not very good at predicting the actual data, the actual data on output per person, so it seems like we're missing something. There must be something else that also, in addition to the differences in capital per person, helps us explain the differences in output. What might that Other thing be Uh, could labour, except that we're doing everything, so if we were to do this in absolute overall output per person, then you're right, but we're, uh, sorry, output levels, but we're doing this in output per person, right? So every, so we're controlling for labour basically we're doing everything per worker per labour. So then there's only one other thing that we can vary, right? And what is that? Productivity or well let's call it TF let's let's call it TFP total factor productivity or A, right? That's the only other thing in the model here that we can ultimately still vary. We made the assumption for simplicity to as you know, we, we assume that it was the same across all countries, that clearly is not good because when we just vary capital per person, we're not gonna be able to match the differences in output per person. So, we would also have to vary A. The TFP parameter in order to be able to explain the differences in output per person. You have a question? Uh Hold your thought, we'll get there. OK, we'll have a discussion about this in a moment. Um, Now, What we would ideally like to do is to just, Just like what we did over here, right, we've got observations for the differences in capital per person, why not just also have the observations for the differences in TFP per person across the different countries, plug in that number, and then predict what output per person says in our model and compare it to the data. The problem is that we can't measure A, or we cannot measure it well. And we'll have a discussion about this in a moment. So really, the only thing we can do is to treat it as a residual. To basically back out what A would have to be in order for the model to match the data. So we're kind of going in reverse now. So how do we do this? Well, there's the following. We've got data on per capita GDP, right, and we've got, Observed capital per person, we've already seen this, and we can. Raise that to the power of 1/3, which is what we already did, and now, rather than just calculating what output per person should be, assuming that the A is the same across all countries, Let's simply. Calculate what the implied total factor productivity parameter A should be for each of the countries in order for the production function to match the data. So really what we're doing is this is our production function over here. And all I'm doing now is solving this for A. In other words, I'm dividing Y output per person through by K to the power of 1/3. Because remember we've got data on this, and we've got data on K and just raising it to the power of 1/3 is pretty straightforward, so I can calculate what the A is. This is not what we measure, but this is what would be implied if the model perfectly matches the data. And so this is what the implied A looks like. Right, it's a, it's a calculation, it's not, it's not observed, it's what the model says A would have to be in order to match the data, and, What do you conclude? Let's put it this way, if A was irrelevant for explaining differences. In output per person. Would our table look like this? No. Because what do we see? We see that. For Burundi Where we've got low per capita GDP. We've got relatively low TFP. In Switzerland, where we have relatively high per capita GDP we have relatively high TFP. And everything in between. In other words, TFP. Varies quite a lot across countries, from 8% of the US GDP to, 105% of US GDP, so a lot of variation in TFP. Is required in order to explain the differences in living standards. Therefore, yes, you know, going back to our original question, capital does help us explain some of the differences in living standards, but it only goes so far. Ultimately we have to assume that TFP varies a lot across countries as well in order to explain all the differences in living standards. Now that probably doesn't come as a big surprise to you, that's probably what you would have intuited anyway. But it's good for us to think about this in a slightly more rigorous way. So going to a slightly different way of presenting this rather than having it a table, we can think of this um in a diagram using the production function, um, this was our initial exercise over here, suppose China had the same TFP as the US did, right? Then that means that China would be on the same production function as the US. It would just have a lower capital output, uh capital labour ratio than the US and so with the lower capital labour ratio, it would produce less output than the US. But this is a counterfactual because China actually produces less output than. This point over here, China only produces this much output per person, and so that means that China must be on a lower production function than the US with lower TFP because the one thing that shifts the production functions up and down is the TFP parameter A. Right, so that's, it's, it's, there's nothing new here, that's just a way to visualise graphically what we just saw in the, in the two tables. Everyone clear about that? Cool, then um might as well just. Take a break here, 8 minutes, um, and then we'll continue with uh the growth accounting exercise. Thanks. I saw this equation on the OK, let's return. Any questions about what we did so far? Remember now is always a good time to ask because we. Continue, it doesn't necessarily get any easier, so. Alright. OK, so we've identified that capital goes some way towards explaining differences in output per person. But clearly differences in TFP are also required in order to match the differences uh in output per person across the world, uh. When we take our model to the data. So one thing that we sometimes do is to Quan try to quantify just how important, The capital component is and how important the TFP component is. When we observe changes in output. This is a process that we call growth accounting, OK, it's a way of dividing a country's growth experience. Between growth in the primary sectors or production factors and uh growth in the secondary production factors. So we'll just use our Cobb Douglas production function again and do a slight manipulation, basically we take our production function and um and uh, Break it down into its constituent growth components so that we can then uh use whatever measurements we have in the data to compute what the different components are. Uh, so again, take the Cobb Douglas production function, and now we just have to use, in order to break this down, we have to use a simple rule. So first of all, we know, we've seen this before, right, that, The Growth rates of a product of two terms is equal to. The growth rate of the 1st term plus the growth rate of the 2nd term. We already saw this. Now, however. If one of the product, if one of the factors is raised to the power of alpha, Then, more generally, the growth rate of a variable Z. That is equal to x to the power of alpha is going to be equal to Alpha, in other words, the exponent times the percentage change or the growth rate in that variable, right, that's just a shorthand. Little trick that uh is very useful when you're dealing with growth rates, again, that's generically true. Growth rate of Z. Is equal to the exponent on X times the growth rate on X, um. We've got a whole production function here, so we can break this down, we can say that the growth rate of Y is equal to the growth rate of A times alpha times the growth rate of K plus, uh, sorry. The growth rate of A plus the growth. Scrap that. It is the growth rate of A plus alpha times the growth rate of K + 1 minus alpha times the growth rate of L. Is an example in a moment. So here's an example, suppose, um. L is equal to 0, right? Um, there's no change in L and there's no change in A, then the growth rate of Y is just going to be equal to alpha times the growth rate in capital. Simple as that. And if alpha is equal to 0.25, say, then that means that a 1% point increase in capital, 1% point increase in capital times 0.25 is going to increase output per person by 0.25% or 25 basis points. The same type of reasoning is going to allow us to do something for labour, so now we're holding capital constant, but we're allowing labour to change, and so if we've got a 1% change increase in labour, and alpha is still equal to 0.25%, that means that this term here is 0.75% and so output per person is going to increase by 75 basis. 0.75%. And likewise for A, assuming that capital and labour doesn't change, then uh, In a 1% point increase in TFP parameter A is going to translate 1 for 1 into 1% point increase in output per person. So that's just using this formula throughout, and now we can just use all the terms together, um, and we can see that the percentage change in output is equal to these three components, and obviously the size of these first two components is going to depend on the. Exponent alpha. And in that way you can see how alpha measures the importance of capital in the production function, how much, and what the contribution is to the change in output. The bigger is alpha, the more capital is doing in order to explain any given change in output per person. Right, so this allows us to then play around with some numbers um and this is indeed what economists sometimes do if they're trying to understand that historically, for example, where was the growth coming from, just a moment, where was the growth coming from? Was it primarily because there was an increase in labour? Was there primarily an increase because there was an increase in capital, or was there primarily an increase because there was an increase in TFP? Um, so yeah, I'll just take your question first. Can we use these? Um, be good to know them. But you should be able to derive them yourself if you know those, if, if you know that the growth rate of a product of two terms is just equal to the sum of the growth rates of the two individual term. And you take the exponent. Down That's That's the only maths really that you need in order to be able to then write this down. Did you have a question? Sorry, you raised your hand. Complicated equations. Um, Just think of them as easy equations. And then it's not such a big deal. It's it's not as complicated as it seems, really. They're just, they're really just two steps here. There is, or, or two things. That you need to know because you've got Z is equal to, Y times X, right, and so the growth rate of Z is equal to the growth rate of Y times the growth rate of X. And if you have Z is equal to X to the power of something, let's call it A, then the growth rate of of X, and this is just another way of saying the percentage change, this is very messy. Um, So the percentage. So the pen is not working very well. Percentage change in X. We sometimes just write this as delta X over X, right? It's just another way of writing exactly the same thing because we're looking at the change in X, like we, we had this in the measurement thing, right, the change in X, so two consecutive values of X divided through by X gives you a percentage change. Um, And here this is just saying percentage change, right? So that's the same thing as the delta X over X. So if Z is equal to X over over A, then uh this means that delta. So that was my fault. Delta Z over Z is equal to 8 times Delta X over X. And that's those are the only properties that we use. The rest is just plus and. Plus and minus and multiplication, there's nothing. So really it's, it's not. As complicated as it may seem at first sight. It's supposed to be a Y. Um So if capital is growing at 4%. labour is growing at 1%. TFP grows at 1% and alpha is equal to 0.25, then we can calculate what the economic growth rate is going to be, right? It's going to be equal to 2.5, 2.75%. Because we've got numbers, we know what the alpha is, it's 0.25 and we were given data for this and data for this and data for this, and all we have to do is plug it in and and do the calculation. Which is again just simple addition and multiplication. Um, As I said before, we don't typically have information on A or good data or good measurements. And when we have a discussion about what A is, it'll become pretty clear why we don't have good measurements of A. So once again, Because we don't have data on it, we often have to calculate it as a residual. In other words, we solve the whole equation for a because we can measure output per person and we can come up with measurements for the other terms and then we just solve for A instead because that's the one thing that we don't measure well. Right So, which is just comparable to what we did in the table earlier where we, we said the implied TFP right? we because we didn't have a direct measurement of A, we decide, OK, well we've got a measurement of everything else, let's just calculate what the A would be implied according to our model. And so here is an exercise in growth accounting for Australia between 1980 and 2013 using this kind of growth accounting um framework that we just uh uh that we just worked through, um, and you can see that this is the growth rate of GDP overall, and it'd be kind of nice to know why, Australian GDP has been growing, is it, for example, because we've just added a whole bunch of workers because of immigration, for example, or is it because we've become a lot more productive, we've had all this investment that's led to significant increases in total factor productivity, or because we've added lots of machines to our total capital stock or whatever, right? Um, and then it breaks down into these three components. So yes, there's been an increase in L in total amount of labour. There has been an increase in K as well, and there has been a, uh, an increase in total factor productivity. So in other words, all in this, in this episode anyway, these 2033 years, all three seem to contribute. Significantly to um to the growth rate of GDP but that's not always the case, there are other times, other episodes where one, Production factor, whether primary, secondary may actually be much larger than the others, um. That, that, like I said, that varies over time and of course across countries that may be quite different as well. So this is the kind of stuff that's certainly of interest to, uh, you know, people at Treasury, um, sort of thinking about policy, thinking about well how can we make, how can we make people better off um now this is GDP overall, right? This is not per capita again, so we have to be clear, distinguishing between total GDP as opposed to per capita GDP. So, if we just want to increase GDP overall in Australia. Uh, one relatively easy way, at least over time, is to just increase the population, right, just increase the number of people in Australia and typically there's always going to be a positive contribution as we increase L we're going to increase the population and therefore overall amount of output that's produced in in Australia. But that doesn't say anything about living standards yet, so ultimately if we're talking about living standards, we'd want to, Talk about output per person. In other words, we would want to divide the growth rate of GDP through by the by the growth rate of L, so that the only thing that we're left with is figuring out what the contribution of K, the capital stock and the contribution of total factor productivity TFP is. Um, Yeah, and this is, like I said, this is stuff that uh treasury and policymakers are particularly interested in. More recently, especially, and the, the Productivity Commission as well, um, particularly because in the last 15 years or so there has been a massive decline in productivity. Australia has not. Been able to increase its productivity in the last 15 years and that's a concern for policymakers because it means that we're not as well off as we possibly could be or would like to be, yes, that's the $1 trillion question. If there was an easy answer to that, um. I think you're on your way to. Become elected prime minister or treasurer or something like that. Um, again, let me defer that because I wanna talk about TFP a little bit later on, we'll have a discussion. I know I've been putting it off, but it's, it's there, um, and then I'm happy to, to take that question up again, OK? Um, but it is, yeah, it's a good question. Any Concerns Questions Grievances. Gripes, No. OK. Then I want to move on to the next step of doing. Some more formal analysis because what we've done so far, I mean yes we've done some growth accounting there that's true um but but it's mostly still been essentially static analysis and when we look at the tables we're looking at are the differences in capitals endowments able to explain the differences in output per person, but it was essentially a snapshot in time. Right, that doesn't really help us understand how countries grow, how they change over time. And how They Evolve relative to other countries. So I want to now start thinking about how we might develop a dynamic model, one about economic growth, and I'm going to commit a little bit of a crime here because, We have in our simple exercise. Already identified that. Whilst capital helps us explain some differences in living standards, it's not gonna take us super far. Clearly we need to take into account differences in TFP if we want to explain living standards. But I'm going to pretend for the moment that. The growth process is nonetheless Determined by changes in the capital stock, so it's basically going back to my original question saying, OK, let's imagine that really it's just capital that matters, and now let's think about how the capital, Changes over time, how the capital accumulation process looks like and how that translates into changes in output. So taking that static model that we started off with and making it dynamic. Again, I know that that's not gonna be, we, we know we know now already it's not gonna be super satisfying because I'm not putting enough emphasis on TFP but it's, it's also about uh developing the techniques to uh think about these um issues in a dynamic way. So We're gonna focus on capital formation as the growth process, right? What do we mean by capital formation? Well, increases in the capital stock. So we know that higher K means higher Y. And so now we imagine the growth process to be one that follows from accumulating capital. The more capital you accumulate, the more why output you're going to have. Well, where does the capital accumulation come from? How does it occur? How do we add capital to the capital stock? Well, that's what we call investment, right? In macro terms, using macrolanguage or economic language more generally, investment is what we mean by adding to the capital stock or capital formation. So really what we're doing is writing down a model of investment and see how investment drives economic growth. And when we look at the data, we actually see that there is this positive relationship between long run levels of GDP per capita and countries' investment rates. In other words, the higher their investment rates, the higher their long run GDP levels are going to be. Why? Because they accumulate more capital and more capital means more output. Obviously it's not gonna be quite that simple, OK, so this is a model, it's also often referred to as the neoclassical model, um, it's a model of capital accumulation. It goes by another name as well, namely the solo swan model, especially in academic circles. It's often referred to as the solo swan model. Uh, sometimes, especially elsewhere in the world, it goes by just the solo model because Bob Solo famously wrote a paper that won him the Nobel Prize. He, if you remember his face appeared in our first lecture. Unfortunately, Trevor Swan of the ANU. Wrote a similar paper, arguably a better paper, a little bit more sophisticated, um, wrote a similar paper to Bob Solo at the same time. Um, he didn't win a Nobel Prize. Because Well, your guess. He was living in Australia, teaching at an Australian university, and Bob Solo was at MIT in the US and tells you something about how the profession works. So, at least in Australia and certainly in AU, we try to honour Trevor Swan and refer to it as the solo Swan model. And to be fair to Bob Solo, who was, was a lovely gentleman. He was the first to admit that Trevor Swan should have, Been given at least as much credit for the theory as he has, right, so he was, he was very generous in that way, um, but that's how it goes so um I will nonetheless occasionally probably just refer to it as the solo model but otherwise I'll try to refer to it as the solo swan model. OK, so the Solar Swan model is a model of capital accumulation, and our starting point is once again the same production function as we had before. Cobb Douglas And we've got our productivity parameter A, TFP here, capital and labour, the two primary production factors with an exponent alpha equal to 1/3. Once again we've got our time subscripts and here they're going to be important. They're going to really matter because these values are going to change over time, right? We're doing a dynamic model, so we are interested in seeing how labour is going to change over time and our capital is gonna change over time, output's gonna change over time and so on. Then Another component of this model that we're going to have to Grapple with is the resource constraint. What do we mean by the resource constraint? Well, we now have. The following Additional problem to consider, namely, there's so and so much output that's being produced in this economy. Some of the output is going to be consumed. And the other bit of the output is going to be invested. So the way I always think about this is imagine a really simple world. A world of Robinson Crusoe, right? Robinson Crusoe, the 17th century hero of the. Of the in the novel by Daniel Defoe of the same name. Uh, he was shipwrecked on a tropical island and only halfway through did he discover that he actually wasn't alone, there was someone else on the island whom he then befriended. Anyway, he's on his own and he can do one thing, he can collect coconuts, right, it's a tropical island. And every day he spends a certain number of hours collecting coconuts, and he can do two things with those coconuts. He can eat the coconuts, in other words, consume them, or he can take a coconut and bury it in the ground and water it and serenade it or whatever you do in order to grow coconut palms, right? And as you grow more coconut palms, you're going to get more coconuts, right? I mean, that's the whole point of investment is that you're, you are willing to forego consumption now, less consumption now, so that you can increase the amount that you are able to produce in the future. Right. Otherwise, why invest? So that's what, what, what Crusoe can do, he can, he can eat a coconut, he can consume it, or he can invest the coconut, in which case he's gonna get more coconut palms in the future. And there's nothing else. That we can do. Now you might say, oh, but what if, what if Robinson Crusoe actually likes throwing the coconuts out into the ocean and watching how they bob on the waves because that's kind of fun, you know, you get a bit bored after a while alone on a tropical island, and then, well, you know, the coconut's away, it's gone, that's the equivalent to having eaten it, you call that consumption. From an accounting point of view, it's just one or the other, consumption or investment. So this is what we're saying here is that output is either consumed or invested. And does this somehow look familiar from somewhere? I see Lots of nodding heads. Arms Going up What is this? We've seen this before? Anyone? Rewind a couple of, sorry? It's, that's GDP here, that's right, um, and what do we call this whole equation? From the expenditure approach or national income accounting identity, right? Correct. OK, yeah, from the expenditure approach C+ I, except that G is equal to 0 because Robinson Crusoe is on his design, there's no on his own, there's no government, and net exports is equal to 0 because Robinson Crusoe is on his own on an island and he's not trading with anyone else on another island. OK, so C+ I is equal to Y. Correct. OK. Now, this is where it becomes a little bit more interesting. We now have to think about how the capital accumulation process looks. And We're simply putting down a dynamic. equation that shows us what's happening to the capital stock in each period. And What we're basically doing is we are, Change in capital which in the static model was exogenous, it was essentially just given, right? In the static model, we just had to plug in a number for the amount of capital that we had remember we had a table with all the observed capital per person, so it was essentially exogenous, it was just a number that we had to plug into our model. Now we are trying to explain capital over time. It's becoming one of the key features of why we're writing down this model in the first place. It's one of the variables that we want to. That we want to solve for and so we are what we call endogenis capital. We are no longer treating it as exogenous, but instead we're adding another equation so that we can explain and solve for capital. So this seems like a pretty straightforward way of thinking about how the capital stock evolves. So the capital stock in the following period, Is equal to the capital stock from the previous period, right, it just inherit whatever you had in the previous period, plus the amount of investment, namely the amount of capital that was added to the capital stock. Through investment, minus a certain amount of capital that was destroyed in the process, because as we saw before, there's always a certain amount of capital that gets destroyed because of the laws of physics and so on, right? We call that depreciation. And depreciation we think of as being a linear process, so it's simply equal to the depreciation rate, a certain percentage times the total amount of capital that's there. So if you want to use the, the uh the Robinson Crusoe analogy, right, then imagine that the capital stock here is the number of palm trees. So let's say this is 100 palm trees, um, how many palm trees is Robinson Crusoe gonna have in the next period? Well, suppose he buried 10 coconuts from which they grow 10 new palm trees, so that would suggest he's got 110. Uh, palm trees, right, as a capital stock, um, but 5 die every period, um. Yeah, because they reached old age or maybe there's a cyclone that sweeps over the island every year or whatever. Um, and so 5 are taken away, which means that the capital stock in the following period is gonna be 105. That's how we should think about it, yes. DKT, OK, so, um, so this is the capital stock in period T, right, that's the number of palm trees. In the example that I use, otherwise think of it as the, the number of machines that are out there, right, the number of aeroplanes that Qantas has or whatever. And D is the depreciation rate, so it's a number between 0 and 1. And what determines the depreciation rates? Well, How long can Qantas, Fly an aircraft. I don't know, somewhere like 30 years or something like that, um, depends on how well it's maintained. Why doesn't it last forever? Stuff happens, right, you hit an air, you hit a bird along the way, the rivets start becoming loose, um, Stuff breaks, right, the material gets tired, um, and so eventually it, it becomes no longer useful and, That's obviously going to depend on. The machine that you're talking about, the capital, so sometimes the depreciation rate is higher, sometimes it's lower, sometimes it may just also be because it becomes obsolete, as I said before with IT Computers, for example, have a really high depreciation rate. Because they're seen to become unuseful pretty quickly because technology moves on so fast, right? And so a laptop from 5 years ago is considered old and for the scrap heap. My computer is 5 years old. Um, Does that, does that make sense? Yeah, OK. So, so that tells us how the capital stock evolves over time, right? Um. We can We can rewrite this, by the way, we can say we can bring KT plus one. So we can bring KT over to the other side. Right, I'm just putting this over to the other side. We can, this becomes the change in KT, right? KT + 1 minus KT is just the change in KT. That's what the delta means. The the the change of that variable across two successive periods, what is the delta KT then? Well, that's just equal to I. Minus DKT. So the delta KT is what we call net investment. That's what the actual observed change in the capital stock, that's net investment, net of depreciation. That's what the net stands for, it's net depreciation, net of depreciation, which means that the I here is gross investment. So if Suppose this is suppose capital is 100 and gross investment is 10. And depreciation is 10. Then Gross investment is just large enough in order to replace the capital that is being destroyed in the pro in the production process. So that means that KT plus one is just gonna be equal to KT. Right. Meaning that net investment is equal to 0 in that case. So for net investment to be positive, you actually have to have gross investment. That's greater than the amount of capital that's uh that's depreciating that's being destroyed in the process of, of production. Now we need a couple more. Components or pieces for our model. Um, we could. Vary labour as well, we could let the amount of labour being employed change, but that just makes things complicated, so we'll just assume that labour is constant for the moment. Because again what we're trying to do is just come up with a simple model that allows us to think about what happens when capital changes over time. Alright, so we'll just keep labour constant. And now we have to think about. How the investment choice is made. In other words, whenever Robinson Crusoe at the end of his day collects his coconuts, how does he decide how many coconuts to consume and how many coconuts to bury in the ground? In other words, invest. We have to decide on something and so we're going to once again assume something simple. We're gonna say that he just always chooses a fixed proportion, a fixed proportion of his output of all his coconuts, he's going to eat, and the remainder he's going to bury in the ground and invest. OK, and that proportion is given by S bar and it's called, The investment rates. Or equivalently, the savings rate, because one thing that should hopefully become clear already, is that, Savings is just equal to investment, how so? Well, Think about what saving is from, you know, think about Robinson Crusoe, whatever output he does not consume is what he's putting aside for the future. That is what we call saving, right? But take our resource constraints and it should be clear that Y minus C is just equal to I investment. So saving is just the same thing as investment. And that's why the investment rate here is often denoted by a little S, because it's also the savings rate, the same thing. OK. Now is this going to be an optimal decision for Robinson Cruso? We don't know, we don't really know what his preferences are. Um, Yeah, we'd we'd have to come up with a proper utility maximisation problem in order to determine what the optimal investment function is. We don't know, so this is, this is just a shortcut, this is just a simple way of saying, OK, just a fixed proportion, uh, let's assume this is something like 30%, for example, 0.3%. Seems like a reasonable number. It's actually pretty high, it's probably more like 0.2 or so, but. Everyone With me so far? OK, so that means we can put this all together into a system of equations. This is nothing new, it's just, it's just putting it all on one page. So what have we got? We've got a production function. We've got our capital accumulation equation, and remember this delta KT is just the same as KT + 1 minus KT. Now we've just put the KT term over to the other side. labour force, we assume to be a constant number 1 bar. Then we've got our resource constraint, which is just the same as the national income accounting identity. And we've got our allocation of resources, in other words, our investment function. And so this is a system of 5 equations. And we have 5 unknowns for 5 endogenous variables. So in general, if we want to solve. For the endogenous variables. How many equations do we need? In order to solve for our endogenous variables. Do you remember this from Linear algebra. School Or, and you? If I have 8 endogenous variables, how many equations do I need in order to get an exact solution? 8 Correct. Will any 8 equations do? No. They actually have to be what we call linearly independent, right, they have to be independent equations. You can't just have one equation replicating the other because then they're not independent. So you have to have 8 independent equations, if you've got 8 endogenous variables, if you've got 105 endogenous variables, you'll need 105 equations. If you have more endogenous variables, then you have equations, what happens? Too many endogenous variables, not enough equations. You end up with an infinite number of solutions essentially, right? Not you don't get a nice single solution. And if you don't have enough uh sorry, if you have more equations than you have endogenous variables, So too many equations, not enough endogenous variables, then uh you're likely to not get a solution either because it's probably gonna be inconsistent, right? Uh there's gonna be some contradiction there somewhere. Unless you're lucky, but it's gonna be coincidence, so. So you want just as many variables, endogenous variables as you have linearly independent equations. Um, so that's always an easy way quickly to determine whether you're gonna be able to solve for something or not. Um, what about these things over here? Uh, well, these are parameters and or exogenous variables. So the L bar is what I would call an exogenous variable, right, um, and the K 0 is what I'd actually call an exogenous variable as well. This is the starting value of capital, right? Technically, capital is an endogenous variable, but because it's a dynamic process, we need to know what's the the value of capital is gonna be when we start the whole process. We got to start with something that's gonna come from somewhere. So that's why it's on. And then the other three are parameter values, the TFP parameter, the investment parameter, and the depreciation parameter. So again, those are numbers that we just have to plug into the model line. We can't solve the model if we don't have numbers for these for these variable uh these parameters. Is that, is that clear? So all you need is values for these 5 here. If you've got values for these 5, then you can just solve for the whole thing. And it's actually becomes quite easy then because it's recursive, right, because if you, if you've got a value for L, then you know what LT is, um. If uh you've got a value for keynotes. Um, you start off with K, uh, you start off with this, you're able to determine what the capital stock is going to be. Um, and then you can solve for the other variables recursively, so it becomes, it's not, it, it's not nearly as difficult as it looks. And so the, the dynamic of this model is essentially the following, this is, this is how it works, this is what's happening here, to build some more intuition. Is that we need capital in order to produce output, right? That's, it's one of the production factors you need capital in order to produce output, the more capital stock, the more output we are going to produce. Now, if we produce more output. We can also invest more. Ras Gruzzo has more coconuts and so of the many coconuts that he has produced, he can now invest more than he was able to before and that investment is going to lead to an increase in the capital stock, which means that in the following period with a higher capital stock, you can produce more output, and with more output you can then invest more and higher investment means more capital stock and so on. So this is a kind of self reinforcing dynamic. The question is, does this go on forever? Does it explode into infinity or what are the properties of this dynamic process? Because this kind of looks. On the face of it, it kind of looks cool, you think, OK, well. Just kind of sit back and and watch the economy grow, um. Just keep keep planting more palm trees and and uh and you'll have more and more coconuts over time and everything will take care of itself, but maybe it's not so simple, so we need to think a little bit more about um about how this works. OK, um, I think we've. Gone through quite a bit of material today, it's not easy, um, so we'll continue with this tomorrow, um, the next bit tomorrow is, Probably the most demanding, I think, um. Um, but yeah, we'll, we'll work through it, it'll be fine. It's fun. Believe me, it's good. See you then.
