SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Hi, good afternoon everyone. Welcome back. Can you hear me in the back as well? OK, cool. Um, very briefly, because I didn't have my electronic pen with me last time. I just like to spend 2 minutes on the Solar Swan diagram again just to make sure everyone understands it fully. there was a question yesterday about. What else we can include, what other variables we can map on the Salawan diagram and basically. Everything that we're interested in. Is going to follow from this basic diagram. In particular, uh, we can read off, uh, investment, gross investment, we can read off depreciation. Obviously we can read off net investment, the change in the capital stock, we can also read off total output if we draw, The output curve, what is the output curve going to look like? Well, we've seen this many times before, it's just going to look like this. Uh, or maybe not. All right. Going to look like that, right? It's gonna have a similar shape to the investment curve. The whole reason why the investment curve looks like that is because it's just a fixed proportion of total output. So if this is total output, then. Why is this not working? Um, if that's total output, then, uh, multiplying that by a number between 0 and 1 is just going to shift the investment curve down. As a consequence, we can also easily read off consumption. Consumption is. We know this from our. National income accounting identity consumption is just the difference between output and investment, right? Well, we can read off output over here investment is over here and so this vertical distance over here is gonna be consumption. And That's will hold in the steady state, of course, but it will also hold outside the steady state. So whatever dynamics we uncover for this system. As it applies to say the capital stalker output is going to apply to all the other variables as well. So suppose we start off at K0 and. Thus realise that we are below the steady state. In other words, in the transition period towards the steady state capital is going to accumulate capital stock is going to grow over time. That means that output is going to grow over time as well. It follows the principle of transition dynamics just like any other variable in the economy. In other words, the movement towards the steady state is going to be fast when we are far away from the steady state, and the closer we get to the steady state, the slower the movement towards the steady state is going to be. So it's asymptotic behaviour the capital stock initially accumulates quickly. We're adding a lot to the capital stock over here we're only adding small amounts to the capital stock. Consequently here we are adding a lot to output initially because we're far from the steady state as we get closer to the steady state we are not. Increasing output at a very fast rate and similarly for consumption, right? So whatever. Dynamics we are able to glean from the solo diagram is going to apply to the other variables that we might be interested in that are not immediately uh visible in there and that's how we use the diagram to. Makes some qualitative predictions about possible changes in the economic environment, right? We could actually do some more work with this, just don't have time, we could do a number of policy experiments. Think about what happens when suddenly the investment rate changes when the depreciation rate changes, the stock of labour changes, etc. and then think about what the transition to that new steady state looks like I'm dropping that here at the moment because we just don't have that much time, right? Um, does that. Clear up any possible confusion or are there more questions specifically about the solo diagram? All good? Cool, alright then. Let me switch to. Our Chapter on money. Where we left off? Yesterday afternoon. So we were talking about The financial and banking system. And I mentioned that there are 2 main Financial instruments. So I'm not gonna review the finance system as such. We talked about direct and indirect finance, but there are two main financial instruments, two ways for firms in particular to finance or fund themselves. What are they again? Yeah, bonds and equity, exactly. So bond is a debt contract. Hey Usually it's kind of standardised debt contract the bond itself is essentially the IOU that written piece of paper that says that one party owes money to the other party and specifies certain characteristics of that debt contract, uh, in particular it might, um, specify. Uh, these three features the maturation date, the coupon payments, and associated with that the coupon rate for that debt contract, right? That's what bonds do, um, and we briefly talked about how the bond price may fluctuate over time depending on what the going market interest rate is. So if there is no change in the interest rates, if the interest rates in the rest of the economy for. Similar Debt contracts. Is the same as the interest rate when the debt when the bond was written in the first place, then the bond price is going to remain unchanged but if market interest rates change, which they want to do on a daily basis, then bond prices are likely to change as well, right? And we. Came up with a quick example here to explain why in general bond prices and interest rates are inversely related. That was bond pricing and then we left off with this idea of uh stock prices equity is, you know, stock is uh what we call a, a residual claim in a company or a share. Uh, the ownership of the company and. The value of the firm that is. Owned by the owners is by the shareholders is what we call equity, right? So stock is essentially what we refer to here as equity. It's a claim to partial ownership of a firm. Of course if you know if you own all the shares, then you are the sole shareholder and therefore you have full ownership of a firm. Now there are many, many, many more legal aspects to not just bonds but also shares and stocks and. Because with ownership comes the legal right to have a say on how the company is run, um, so most shares or stock include. Voting rights you can determine for example who gets to be elected on the on uh various councils or or boards. Directorships and so on, um, but not all stocks, so there, there's a wide range of legal. Aspects to stocks or equity more general that we're not going to cover here, right? We're just trying to focus on some absolute basic concepts. So what's the benefit of holding stock? Well that's hopefully for the owner in order to receive a return. Um, a return on that investment, right, because you are as a shareholder if you buy stock you are essentially putting money into the company and you are obviously doing that in the hope of getting a return. What's that return called? Well that is typically. A dividend, a dividend is a regular payment received by stockholders for each share that they own. Regular in the sense that. Dividends are usually paid at fixed intervals. Not regular in the sense of a coupon payment on a bond, which specifies exactly how much is being paid. The dividends are decided. A new every time a dividend payment. Is just is is uh is imminent by the directors typically of the board right? they decide how much dividend is being paid out to the shareholders and that's largely going to depend on how well the company has been doing if it's making a lot of profit then the dividend payments will increase if the. Firm is not doing well then the dividend payments uh are going to be much smaller and sometimes dividend payments are suspended altogether if the firm is really not doing well at all then the govern the the the directors may decide that it's uh the best policy. In particular to ensure the survival of the firm is to not pay any dividends at all, which of course shareholders don't like, but if the alternative is for the firm to go bankrupt then perhaps uh that's the best uh choice. Um, secondly, um, if shareholders hold on to their shares and are looking to then perhaps sell their stake in the company at some time in the future, the price of the stock may change, in particular, if the price of the stock goes up, they will be making a capital gain just like bond prices can change over time so that's very similar, right? Again, it's an investment you're hoping for a return, that's true for bonds and stocks. The price of the asset that you're holding can also change over time and if you then were to sell it, you'd hopefully sell it for a higher price, make a capital gain that applies to bonds just as much as it does to stocks. Or shares. So how are shares priced? Well, once again, and it follows a very similar pattern to what we saw with bond prices, we can imagine the following examples. Suppose that you want to buy a share today whose price is going to be $80 in one year's time, and you're expected to receive $1 dividend in one year's time. In other words, you're going to get $81 all up. How much will you be willing to pay for that share? Right, these are financial markets, so the key when trying to price assets is always to think about the opportunity cost. What else could you do with the money that you are investing? And so it's always, it always comes down to essentially a uh uh a cost benefit argument or an arbitrage argument um so that. The return from owning the share must be at least equal to the return from holding alternative financial instruments and that's always at the heart of how you price assets in the financial markets. So suppose the return from holding government bonds is 6%. And the return from holding a share, therefore, must also be at least 6%, or else everyone would just pile into bonds and not hold any shares. If you expect a $1 dividend and an $80 stock price in one year, you should pay no more than what? Well, the stock price that you're willing to pay 1.06 equals $81. That's the pricing formula, much like we saw for the bond price. OK, just solve that for the stock price and you get this figure over here $76.42. That's essentially what the financial markets do is they price the stocks always based on what they think the stock price is going to do in the future, what they think the dividend is going to be in the future, and then correct for any kinds of other factors, risk, for example, um, and so on. Right? Uh, if instead you were to expect a $5 dividend instead of a $1 dividend, and once again, Assume that the price in one year is going to be $80 then you should pay no more than $80.19 which just goes to show, as you might expect, that the higher expected dividend in the future is going to increase the value of the stock today. Right? The more you expect to be paid in the future for that stock, the uh the more you're willing to pay for the stock today, um, to. Take advantage of that higher return. Uh, so that is why. And that is why stocks or financial, uh, the prices of assets in general, but particularly for shares are extremely volatile because they react to news about future events. Because they automatically get priced into the current price of an asset. So if there is a pharmaceutical company, say, and The rumour mill spits out that this pharmaceutical company has developed a cure for cancer. Everyone immediately assumes that even if this is a few years away, if that rumour is reasonably reliable, that pharmaceutical company is probably going to make a killing. Selling that cancer treatment drug. In other words, the profits are going to increase dramatically, meaning that the dividends are going to go up a lot, and so the current share price will jump up. And it all happens in a matter of seconds, sometimes microseconds because financial markets are trying to price in everything very quickly, right? Of course, Expectations about the future are themselves very volatile. They can, they can be. They can shift very quickly. If a rumour is able to Shift the stock price in a matter of a couple of seconds, then even the slightest adjustment to that rumour is also going to change the asset price in a matter of seconds, and that is why you can really have share prices changing on a second by second basis as people are continuously revising their expectations of the uncertain future. Importantly, when we talk about asset prices, As I said yesterday, financial markets are fundamentally characterised by uncertainty and asymmetric information. And That is what both parties. In any kind of financial transaction need to take into account anyone who is investing anyone who's lending will want to be compensated for any kind of uncertainty and important part of the uncertainty is uh the possibility of returns not materialising to the extent that you would hope or are expecting so that means that. Any return is going to have to include some kind of risk premium that refers to the rate of return that financial investors require in order to hold risky assets minus the rate of return on a safe asset. Now there is no such thing as a perfectly safe asset. Perfectly safe doesn't exist, not in this world. But there are assets that are virtually perfectly safe. And those assets very often are government bonds. Government bonds are typically for industrialised nations like Australia and so on, are typically seen as the safest assets. And so that that's one reason why it's important to have a deep liquid market for government bonds because they provide this benchmark that the financial markets are looking for of what the price of a safe asset is so that price may change as well of course over time depending on interest rate changes. But they are assets that essentially have a zero risk premium. They are considered as safe as they can be. OK, and. It's it's it's hard to underestimate just how important it is to have this benchmark because if you don't have a benchmark for safe assets, it becomes very difficult for financial markets to price all the other assets because their riskiness is often priced relative to the safe assets that government bonds provide, right? Is everyone clear about that? Yeah. So would it be a good idea for governments to get rid of debt entirely? And the answer is clearly no. So even if a government is running extremely fiscally prudent policy. Such that they actually don't need to borrow from the rest of, you know, from the public. Virtually all economists argue that governments should nevertheless issue debts so that there are government bonds in circulation in order to provide this benchmark to provide information to the financial markets and let it be known what a safe asset is worth. OK, so the riskier an asset is assumed to be or esteemed to be the higher the risk premium is going to be. Typically, there are exceptions, we'll maybe talk about that. Later if we get time to. Um, So you can really think of the risk premium as being a compensation for accepting risk. Right, so here's an example. If you expect a $1 dividend and an $80 stock price in one year, then the interest rate from holding government bonds is 6%, but you require an additional 4% return in order to compensate for the risk associated with holding that stock, then. What you should pay is the stock price times 1.10 now equal to $81. OK, so the relevant interest rate for pricing the stock in this case is not the 6% that we used before, but instead the 10% because we're actually also taking into account the risk premium. Because there is uncertainty associated with this and so unsurprisingly, the stock price here that satisfies this pricing equation is a lower 1 $74.64. And this clearly highlights why risk and reward. are positively correlated, right? In expectation. Higher, so if you've got a higher reward. In expectation, the only way really that's possible in the financial markets is if you incur more risk or the other way around if someone is asked to incur more risk, they will want to at least an expectation incur a higher reward to compensate for that. Right. So, bond and stock markets, right? They are the two markets that provide funding means of channelling funds from savers or borrowers, hopefully with productive opportunities, that's the idea. And issuing new bonds or stocks sends the signals to the savers that the firm is confident in planning the use of funds such a way that they're likely to be profitable, right? So both markets are there in order to enable. Production, ultimately, because a lot of production requires external funding. Bond and stock markets also help to reduce risk by giving savers a means to diversify their financial investments, right? Again, if we only had simple peer to peer lending, that would be very difficult. The informational constraints are massive. Imagine how little I, I, I mean just think about if the only way we could finance all of our production was if firms engaged in bilateral peer to peer lending with individuals that's that we probably the entire economy would completely break down so financial markets, uh, enable. Uh Large scale funding of big financial investments they do this through diversification on the saver side um. Solving that informational problem. And uh Yeah, and and and and a number of other reasons that uh I'll skip here for the moment. OK, so that's really just a quick overview of bonds, stocks, financing, the importance of finance. We talk in economics often as if it was just a barter economy. In some instances like we did in the growth model that may be OK as a simplification, but when we start thinking more seriously about how the economy operates we probably have to. Turn our attention to some extent also how the financial markets work. There's obviously a lot more that you can read up on. I encourage you to do so, but you'll have to do that in your own time. Any questions? And some of you are going to be studying finance anyway and so that will seem a little bit easier or straightforward um for others that may be. Uh, uh, a greater challenge. OK, so this chapter is not just about financial markets, but it's also about money and also about prices and inflation, um, so there's a good reason why we all put this together in some ways they're all connected. And I want to spend a moment talking about money. So I've got a I've got two photos here. Of things. Which one of these two is money? The 2nd? OK, so you recognise this as money, um, why? Does that look like money to you? Uh, the first one cannot be moved easily. This is, uh, well, we don't know how big it is, but you assume that it's only about that big, right? Um, and that looks like it's pretty big, you know, you've got some palm trees. This is on Robinson Crusoe's Island here, no, um. OK, so So you refer to the portability of it, right? You, you, you pointing out that. I mean we know this is a coin, right? Uh, it's portable and therefore it can be used as money. Um, any other thoughts or, um, so I'm not saying you're right or wrong, I'm just, and, and portability is obviously useful when you've got money, yes. They are both, so you're saying they're both money. How, how so? How, how, how can that be money? I mean this. These are, this is clearly not portable. Yeah. OK, so considering how old it is, so, so does that mean that everything that's old is money or no? Uh-huh, you feel like I'm leading you somewhere. Um, fair enough. So these here are stone wheels from the Pacific island of Yap. And certainly until quite recently, I don't know whether that's really still true in 2025, but not until too long ago, this was also used as money. But you are right that. These are not very portable, whereas this British coin. From 200 years ago is rather portable, so. How can this also be money? And the reason I'm bringing this up is because it's useful to think in a more nuanced way about what money is, since there are a lot of misunderstandings. To this very day and false stories peddled about. What money is, what money ought to be. What policies governments should pursue. In order to have good money versus bad money and so on. How can those stone wheels on the island of Yap. Be used as money. Yes. Yeah, they they're used to purchase something else that's right that's, that is sort of one of the functions that we typically attribute to money right as a means of payment and that's what we would expect with a coin as well, right? I, I buy. A garment from you and then I hand over the coin as a means of payment um but we've identified that these are not very portable for example so um. Yeah, that's gonna be a lot of hard work, uh, trying to move those, those uh coins. Um, I don't know who was first, so I, I think you were first, sorry, but I'm, I may be wrong. Both are accepted, yeah, fair enough, they're both accepted where they're used for their purposes. That's why they are both money because they, they do what money does, right? But, but how might we think about how this actually works in practise. Um, sorry, I. Um, OK, yeah, fair enough. Again, so they both do what money does, um, but So we can agree that that the portability is very different between these two, right? Does that matter? Why not? They're all in one place, so everyone can see. Um, Not so that suggests that every transaction is sort of and it happens uh. Yeah. OK, so that's, that's, that's one way we could imagine. So when there's a transaction, everyone has to kind of congregate and, and then, and then what happens? You, um, so this is, this is my stone. I buy a piece of garment from you and then what do we do? A bit hard to envisage perhaps but um so let me give you another hint. There are actually stones, so these stones are happily lying there, they are actually. So the lore goes, some of these stones that are lying on the bottom of the ocean floor. And they're still used as money. Yeah. Yep, exactly, it's that's, that's exactly it is it it's, it is really just a manifestation of an IOU of some sort, right? It is a a materialisation of. Yeah, of of an IOU of of a of a past transaction that essentially involves some kind of credit um and this is. This is crucial to think about what money is and also how money has evolved and the functions that money can perform and doesn't perform. The problem is that when you pick up a textbook, Almost always, you will be told. The following story or some version thereof. Namely that money emerged to overcome the inefficiencies of a barter economy. The problem with that story is that it's wrong. It's just not correct. It is a classic example of economists having dreamed up some version of a of the world of history for which there is no empirical evidence and it's really. Taken other social scientists, in particular anthropologists, archaeologists and sociologists to set the record straight slowly economists are coming on board as well. And if you think about it. If economists had really thought about it properly, thinking about how humans behave, they probably would have figured it out themselves, because, let's do the following thought experiments, so go back a few 1000 years and we live. You know, suppose we are a village, all of us here, right? We all have our little huts or perhaps even caves that we live in and we've got a few different things that we do. I you fish, I hunt mammoth, um, you do some grain growing and someone else, I don't know, yeah, that's something else. So now suppose. Um Now suppose we want to engage in some trade, so you, you're the expert. You, you run the fisheries in this village. So I want some fish from you, you give me some fish. I only have mammoth to offer because that's what I do. I hunt mammoth. But you don't want mammoth hide from me at the moment. So we've got a problem, right? The standard barter exchange requires both sides to want what the other has to offer at the same time. If I want your fish and you have fish to offer and I have. Mammoth hide to offer, but you don't want mammoth hide, there'll be no transaction in a pure barter economy. Right? This is what we refer to as the problem of the double coincidence of wants. OK, so this textbook story goes. Oh, well, this is not very efficient, always having to rely on the double coincidence of wants. So to overcome this problem, how about we go to the beach for example and we pick up a shell and we say OK, this shell is money and so now I can get your fish from you and I'll give you a shell in return and we call that money and we can move on. Does that sound realistic? Does that sound sensible? Because What could be an alternative solution to this problem? Suppose I want your fish. And I don't And I'm, I, I've got mammoth hide to offer, but you don't want my mammoth hide now, but you in 3 months it's gonna get pretty bloody cold outside and you will want my mammoth hide to keep you warm. How would we likely solve this transaction problem? Like an IOU in fact we probably don't even have to write it down. I mean, look, we're a village, we see each other every day, right? I just say, look, I want some fish, I'm hungry. I'll give you some mammoth hide in 2 months. OK, fine. In a week's time, you'll greet me in the village square and you say, oh, you haven't forgotten about the mammoth hide, have you? And I said, no, no, no, of course not. Um. In 2 months. I might want to renege on my promise. But you know, you know where I live, you know where my family lives, at some stage you're gonna come swinging your club and saying I want my mammoth hide, you promised me so. And essentially the the way the problem is solved, the problem of the double coincidence of wants is through credit, right? Debt or credit, essentially 22 sides of the same thing. The idea that you just Turn to an external. Item and call that money just doesn't seem. Very natural. And we can do this presumably because we're a village of 60 people, we all know each other, we can all monitor each other, we can all enforce any kind of debt contract easily with one another. But where it becomes interesting is if the village starts to grow and we start to trade with the village next door over there in that lecture hall where there are 3 times as many people and so on now we might get into a situation where we have an ever increasing web of claims against each other. And we need a way to keep track of those claims. How do we do that? Well, we need some kind of bookkeeping or record keeping device. So the earliest. Evidence that we have of such record keeping is the clay cuneiform tablets in old Mesopotamia several 1000 years ago. And in fact that's arguably as anthropologists tell us also when the first number system was invented and writing so there's actually really close link to the emergence of money. Writing No, or, or, you know, written language and, and, and numeracy. Those cuneiform tablets essentially were the, the invention of, of double entry bookkeeping, um, not, no, that's not quite true, not, not double bookkeeping, not quite double entry the way we do today, but, um, and. And as those Transactions became more numerous and the web of interacting and interconnected claims became more and more complicated. It became useful to have a way. That allowed you to sell any kind of claim that you had against someone else. And that then essentially became money. So we ended up with tokens, really, tokens which just captured. As a record keeping device, any kind of claim by one party against another and then you could just use that token to transfer that claim to someone else and that is essentially what's what's happening over here as well if uh right where people essentially just have claims against part of the stone wheel and it just functions as a token of that IOU. Uh, of, of a promise to deliver, uh, something else in the future. So you can, you can see that this is quite, it becomes quite subtle in some ways, um. And you might argue, well, does it really matter exactly what money is and how we should think about it? And it is confusing and all of the monetary economists that I've spoken to. Being one myself. have all said that the more you think about money, the more confused you get. It just there, it's, it's partly because money has. Undergone a long evolution it is it is there are different kinds of renditions of money sometimes money has had intrinsic value, other times it has not had intrinsic value and so on, but ultimately, um, money is, uh, is, is some kind of record keeping device, some kind of token, uh, to capture, um, a web of uh or or or. That that that is used in a web of interacting or interlocking claims um of various parties against each other. Um Nowadays, of course, money is And we have a very particular view of what money is. Um, We don't use those coins. We don't use stone wheels. So we might use something like this. But why Do we accept this, why do we use this as money? So I, I like your pen there, for example. It's a nice looking pen. Would you sell it to me for this thing here? I was thinking No. I like your pen too. Would you Sell it to me for $50. Are those all electronic pens that are really expensive? OK, if I give you a few more of these. As everyone's starting to. Hold on to. Um. Ballpoint pen? Your water bottle, will you sell it for $50? You quite like it. Yeah, me too. Yeah. You don't wanna sell it? You don't, you don't care about your grade, no? I. Um, OK, well, suppose I could find someone who's willing to sell their. Pen to me for $50. If I were to give it to you, um, you could presumably accept the money. But if I instead say oh. Look, I've even got more to offer you here. $51. Yeah, it's a number written on a piece of paper. Are you're happy to have this? You can frame it, you can hang it up in your room. Not enough. OK. Um, why would you happily accept that note and not this in both cases, it's a piece of something that's got a number written on it. I personally really like this, I think it's cool and I think you should accept this just as much as that yellow piece of plastic. But this is paper. I mean, come on, paper versus plastic. Um, what's the difference? Yeah. That's legal tender. Well, I declare this legal tender. What does legal tender mean? Backed by the states. This is backed by me. What does it mean to be backed by the state? Sorry? It's recognised by the state. How so? How does, OK, so it's true that. The state would probably not recognise this, and they would recognise that. How is it, what do we actually mean by recognition of the states? And why are you only willing to accept money that's recognised by the state and not by. Something else, yeah? That's a very good point. You don't pay tax with this. You can try, wanna, wanna join me for a walk to the ATO in town and see whether we can pay our taxes with this, um. So yeah, governments issue money and. One thing that they do in order to ensure that it has value is that they insist that taxes, which almost everyone has to pay, is paid in that money that they issue. And they declare themselves a monopolist issuer. They prevent anyone else from. Printing money as well. And then. If everyone is already paying taxes in this money and it's a reasonably stable store of value, well then you might as well use that very same money for all your other private transactions as well, right? Um, there's one other feature that's important. How does Government ensure that you pay your taxes in that money. Threat of violence exactly or threat of force. The state also has a monopoly on force. It's got a police force, it's got an army, and it can do whatever it needs to do in order to enforce. A contract on you that says that you have to pay your taxes and that money and that's very powerful so. I don't have a monopoly of force, and If I did, I could point a gun at your head, and I could say, except this. For the pen And you probably would. But it wouldn't be a smart idea for me because I would commit a crime and I would probably end up in jail, but the force of the, the, the threat of force or violence is very powerful, right? Um, Does that mean that money has always been government money? Has it always been issued by governments? No, we've had situations where. There has been money issued by private entities, sometimes banks, sometimes corporations, companies. What would you expect, given what we just talked about money being sort of state money. What kind of companies do you think? We're likely to have issued money. Was it sort of Alibaba's around the corner? Because they like the idea of issuing money along with their falafel wraps. Or Perhaps some other kind of company. Exactly something like the Dutch East India Company or the the British East India Company. What were true of those companies? They were huge. They were quasi states almost. In fact, The East India and the Dutch East India Company, they had their own armies. They sent their own mercenaries, mercenary soldiers to the colonies that they traded with and also exploited. To enforce whatever contracts they. Wanted to engage the other side in right? so again it's not surprising if you think about what ultimately. What you need in place in order to be able to issue money. Now there have been other. Other times when for example, banks have had the ability to issue money, there's a so-called era in the 19th century in the US referred to as free banking where there was some competition amongst various banks, but ultimately. If it was the private sector, then it was always really big corporations with a lot of power. Either actual physical power or political power, right? Not your little corner shop on the uh nearby. And That raises some interesting questions about crypto, for example. What do you think? Is cryptocurrency, the emergence of cryptocurrency, let's say something like Bitcoin or whatever, is that likely to replace the Australian dollar? As a money People.
