SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
I could, oh, it's too loud for me. Find a way to All right. Good afternoon everyone. Welcome back. Good to see you to the 2nd half of the course. I hope you had a good break. Meaning that you both have the chance to perhaps catch up with some work, and fill in some gaps, um, but also maybe to switch down a gear and recharge your batteries a little bit, right? Um, as you are no doubt aware, the mid-semester exam is tomorrow evening. I. Presume all the information that's required is on. Wattle or has been answered elsewhere in the tutorials or by me. Um, just a reminder that whatever we do today is not going to be covered in the exam, so, um, should be, should have been clear, um, and whilst week 6 is examinable, I do also take into account that we didn't spend that much time on week 6 material. Partly because we haven't had the tutorials yet, so I take that into account as well, so you can kind of. Assume that what's before that is going to carry greater weight. Cool Any other questions? Oh I'm all good. Yes. Yes, tutorials will run normal tomorrow. I know there is a tutorial from. 5 to 6, I believe, um for some of you. So be it, and that's just what you have to accept. Uh, as long as there's no actual clash between tutorial times and exams, um, we just assume that everyone can make it. OK, So Remember we did. The long run Namely economic growth, plus of course the introductory measurement chapters in the first half of the course, we're into our two bridging chapters, money and, uh, the labour market. Um, I spent a little bit of time talking about money, it's, I think an interesting topic and we could spend a lot more time on it, but we don't really have the time to do that, so I'll try to move on, um, hopefully finish it today so that tomorrow we can, Then move on to our labour market chapter which will see us into week 8 and then we can actually start doing some business cycle analysis, OK, just so you know where you're going and of course um I presume not only that you've. Maybe slept an extra hour every night for the last two weeks and, you know, uh, done whatever, but you've perhaps also spent a little bit more time, uh, watching the news because it seems like there's a lot of fun economic stuff going on at the moment and and a lot of nonsense as well, uh, so. Given that most of this, most of what's been discussed recently, um, not so much talking about the election stuff but more about what's happening and coming out of the US, um, and the tariff talk and, you know, tariffs on tariffs off and so on, um, given that that's, Mostly dealing with open economy issues, I feel like it's best to, Reserve that for week 10 or 11 or something like that when we talk about open economy economics, OK, rather than doing it now and then having to introduce some concepts that we're going to discuss, uh, in a more natural way later on, alright, um, but there is some fun stuff to, uh, I think unpack, um, like I said, what's coming from across the Pacific at the moment. Um, and no doubt that has captured some of your interest as well. OK, so I want to now turn my attention back to money, this is roughly where we left off. We had a lengthier discussion about what money is and, and I, I, I, I said before that the more you think about money, the more you study it, the more you, Try to come up with a theory of money they're kind of freakier it gets, it's, it's. On one level it's very simple, it's straightforward, um, but often what we think of as what money is, is really by thinking about, um, the functions that money performs. So, So this is, and and and that's a useful way to think about money, but it doesn't necessarily um capture, All of the aspects of money, especially historically, so, we often assume that money has 3 main uses or performs three main functions, right? Medium of exchange unit of account and store of value. So what do I mean by medium of exchange? Well, precisely because we're not in a barter economy, but we tend to exchange goods and services for something else that then is accepted for payment elsewhere for another exchange, that means that money is being used as a medium of exchange, as an intermediary between uh between uh. Exchange of goods and services for something else, um, why? Because barter is horribly inefficient, um, we touched on that briefly already a few weeks ago. So medium of exchange overcomes the need um to to have to find an appropriate trading partner in a barter economy so that uh. Increases efficiency a great deal, uh unit of account, um, Basically serves a function of, as the name suggests, being able to have a common metric against which we can measure every the price or value of everything in the economy. Again, we take that kind of for granted, we don't really think about it, but that's certainly also a big efficiency gain. And then finally also a store of value, um, it's an asset that's got to be able to hold its value at least 4. Some time precisely because if it acts as a medium of exchange, that means that we're actually dealing with intertemporal aspect of exchange because if I'm selling my milk now and I I get money in return, I want that money in return and that's why I'm only willing to sell my milk in the first place, because I will want to purchase something else in the future with the money that I received for selling my milk, OK. And if the money were to lose all its value in the interim, then it's not performing its function of money very well. Now, more modern treatments of money will often add 1/4 function of money, which may sound similar to the medium of exchange, but is strictly speaking slightly different, um, and that is that it's a means of settlement. And by that we mean that it's before a court of law, it has the legal ability to extinguish debt. So Not only is it used as a medium of exchange, but if I have a debt and that debt states that I owe someone $100 and I then pay back that debt, I pay. The creditor $100 plus interest perhaps, then in front of a court of law, that means my debt is extinguished. I owe nothing more, right? And this is important because as we've talked about before, for a well functioning financial system we need the rule of law. We need to be able to go to a court of law and say, you know, either I have a valid claim or no I don't have a valid claim anymore. But if I borrowed $100 and I give the creditor instead 3 sheep. And the creditor doesn't want 3 sheep, I can't go to the judge and say, but I paid my debt, I paid 3 sheep. The judge is gonna say, sorry, the contract specified $100 plus interest, you still owe the creditor $100 right, unless the creditor explicitly is willing to accept the 3 sheep um for. Uh, as, as a means of repayment, OK, so, so that just emphasises the, the legal nature of, of money. Now, those four functions, Do not necessarily always apply. There are times when money loses some of these functions. Can you think of some examples? Perhaps conditions under which maybe one of those functions. I lost Yes. Exactly, so during hyperinflation, namely when we have very high rates of inflation, then money clearly, Almost by definition, loses that function of a store of value because it's quickly losing, Uh, it's value, the purchasing power of money is falling, and so it's losing one of its functions, which is why, A regime of hyperinflation is not sustainable forever. It's at some stage it's going to break, it's gonna end somehow or another, a regime of hyperinflation is going to end. Interesting question is how? Yep. Anything else? Sometimes it loses its function as a unit of accounts. Quite commonly also when you've got high rates or very high rates of inflation or perhaps hyperinflation. Because having to rewrite your prices perhaps on a daily basis becomes really tedious. So, what firms then often do is to write down a price in a stable currency, let's say the US dollar, because that's historically often been the case, at least in the last 150 years or so. Write down your price in a stable currency like the US dollar, and then if the domestic price and the domestic currency changes, then all you have to keep track of is what the current exchange rate is between US dollars and the domestic price, but you don't have to rewrite the price tag on a continuous basis, which is just an unnecessary inefficient transaction costs, right? Um, but then essentially, money is losing its unit of account function. Medium of exchange as well, if money becomes increasingly or exceptionally scarce, then, Then it may not be very useful as a medium of exchange because not many, there there's not enough to go around and so people are not necessarily terribly willing to accept it. Examples are like prisoner of war camps where you have the emergence of other currencies that are perhaps less scarce like cigarettes or something like that, which then take on that function as the medium of exchange, um. So yeah, it's just important to remember that they don't necessarily, you know, not all four functions are necessarily performed, um, at all times, at least not, uh, perfectly, um, but, but ideal version of money will, will have these functions, OK. So Having talked about what money is, um, and. Identified that it's not always straightforward, when we do, when we talk about money and macroeconomics, um, We're confronted with this question of what money is because they're different, There are different ways for people. To pay to for their transactions, right, uh, it was common to think of money as really just notes and coins, that's. Understandable, um, we can call that currency more generally, but that's not what money is. On or in and of itself, because most of the payments that we now make in an industrialised advanced country like Australia is actually through using something like an electronic fund transfer EFT, right? You pay with your card. Now what does that do? Well, you've got some numbers in your bank accounts. And all you're doing is you're transferring. Essentially some of those numbers from your bank account to someone else's bank account, and there's, there's no exchange of notes and coins there, let alone anything else, there's no precious metal or anything like that that's being exchanged, it really is just a change. Of ownership over certain numbers, and in that sense that's not very different from what we saw on the island of Yap, right? So you've got that wheel and all you're changing is, is a claim to a certain part of that stone wheel, you're exchanging the the claim from one person to another person. Um, it's just a way of keeping track of, of debt essentially, right? Um, and when we think about what bank accounts are, I think that that highlights this, uh, much more clearly. Now then the question is, OK, well, which kind of bank accounts should we include, which ones should we consider as money? Something Like you Checking account or deposit account is is clearly, uh, very close to money in the sense that you can take your bank bank card and you can pay with it straight away and if there is money in your bank account, then that transfer will work without a problem. Um, you can stick that card into an ATM and get cash for it, so in that sense it's, it's really, really close to currency, even though it's not exactly currency. But then suppose you've got a bank account that, From which you cannot draw cash in an ATM. Um, but you would have to do some online banking first to transfer those mon that the funds in that account to your deposit account so that you can then get it in cash. So that's kind of one step removed from being, Like currency, right? And then maybe there are other accounts where you know something like term deposits where you have to let the bank know that you actually want to take money out, perhaps you have to give them a week's notice or something like that, um, or else if you do it sooner then you're going to incur a penalty, it's gonna cost you a few dollars or a transaction fee or something like that, um, and, and so that again, there's a, there's one step further removed from being like currency because you, Have to uh incur those costs, either logistical costs or actual monetary costs to convert it into currency, and so really what we're looking at here is different degrees of what we call liquidity, right, liquidity is, How close? Some asset is. To being currency or how easily it can be converted into currency. So note that our benchmark here is essentially currency. It is notes and coins, right? The closer an asset is to being currency or the the more easily it can be converted into currency, the more liquid that asset is and the more money like it is. And so because we. Don't want to draw a completely arbitrary distinction between what money is and what money isn't, we have defined as macroeconomists different, So-called monetary aggregates, and the bigger the monetary aggregate is, The, the more encompassing. The monetary aggregate is, the more we're willing to accept that it includes assets that are less increasingly less and less money like, less and less liquid, OK? So, currency, of course, is the most money like money, right, notes and coins, um, but then we, if we add to our currency deposits held by banks, um. In the basic, basic, you know, checking accounts or gyro accounts or something like that, that's often what we refer to as M1, and then we can add some more bank accounts that include, for example, savings accounts, which may be a little bit less liquid than deposit accounts, that may be M2 and M3, and so on, right, so we basically add more and more accounts that we can consider, uh, money, and which, Monetary aggregate we use depends on the question that we are trying to answer or what it is that we're trying to do, and note that different countries will measure monetary aggregates in different ways. There is not necessarily a, It, it, it's not the case that M2 in Australia is necessarily going to be the same as M2 in the US and elsewhere, partly because the banking systems are different and the types of accounts may be different, and so they don't necessarily map 1 to 1 into each other, right? So we have these different, Monetary aggregates and you can see here, What They look like, or importantly, how, how big they are. So when you consider this is for Australia in 2018. Middle of the year, you can see that currency made up about $75 billion. So that's basically all the notes and coins, the value of all the notes and coins that are in circulation at one point in time. If you then add the value of all the of the simple deposit accounts to that, right, that then grows to $353 billion and then if you take even a larger, Sample of um or or a larger measure of uh accounts that are a little bit less liquid, then, uh you come up with something like broad money which is, um, you know, over $2 trillion. And when you look at those numbers, one thing that should. Be pretty clear, pretty obvious is. When you look at the magnitudes, anything that you notice? Anything that's interesting? So compare currency to broad money, right? So often when we talk about money in the sense of we're trying to understand how much money there is to get a sense of, say, total purchasing power in the economy, we typically use pretty broad measures of money, M3 or or higher, so yeah, you were gonna. Between Uh, the difference between M3 and M1, yeah, well, the difference between M3 and currency is even bigger, right? So, so, Currency, the notes and coins in circulation, which is what we often think of as money and everything else sort of seems bank accounts, but so depending on what definition of money we use, notes and coins, currency, make up a really small proportion of the overall wider money supply. In an advanced economy, typically less than 5%, often less than 3%. Now Who issues the notes and coins? The Reserve Bank of Australia. Yes, sort of. Uh, the, the RBA issues the notes. The coins by quirk of history are actually issued by the treasury, but that's, that's interestingly true in a, in a lot of countries, um, but let's say the government, right, so the government issues the notes and coins. What about The rest of money, is that also issued by the government? Exactly, it's, it's issued by banks, essentially, right, it's created within the banking system by the commercial banks. In other words, The amount of money that's under direct control of the government. And this is not how we normally talk about it, right? We think of monetary policy, kind of, yeah, think about, OK, the central bank is controlling money and yeah, but. The amount of money that the central bank or the government is controlling directly is a tiny proportion of the overall money supply of the overall money that's being, uh, that's being used in the economy. And, and that's important. Because it does limit the ability of the government to, Affect the amount of spending that happens in the economy, at least directly, so then the question is, well, can it affect the amount of spending indirectly? Right? It doesn't have total control over the money supply, only. Uh, only indirectly, it only has direct control over a very small fraction of the overall money supply. So That then raises some of the question about what determines the amount of money in the economy, um. And This is where I guess we need to. Maybe take a closer look of how. How the banking system works, um, it can quickly become tedious and take up a lot of time, and I often prefer not to use valuable lecture time to talk about this, um, so I'm gonna race through it now, not least because there was a fair bit of reading about this, um, which I hope you undertook, uh, during the two week break, um, so. So the idea is the following, right? Um, think about a fictional country, doesn't really matter what it's called, uh, the government has printed uh a certain amount of money, let's, or currency, let's call it one guilders, so 1 million guilders, um, and. Assume that all of the money and all the transactions are are intermediated, right, everything goes through the banking system, so no one is stashing money underneath the mattresses or anything like that. So if all the currency of the economy is held in the banking system, right, is intermediated, um, then that means that the entire money supply that the government printed, the 1 million gilders, is going to be on the bank's balance sheet, and this is what we've got here. Um, I don't have my laptop here, so I can't, um. I can't write on the slides, but this is what we've got here, right? This is what a commercial bank looks like, it's got the reserves asset guilders here, and um it's got deposits as liabilities here, essentially, you know, think of everyone having deposited the money in the in the bank accounts, uh, of the various banks, and so this is the consolidated balance sheet for all the commercial banks. Now, the banks will quickly notice that, Not everyone who's a deposit holder is going to come to the bank and want to convert the deposits into currency. Yes, there are some people who walk through the door and will want to convert it into cash, but not everyone. And so they realise that they're actually sitting on a lot of cash that's just sitting there not doing anything, and they say, OK, well, that's a bit silly, right, we're sitting on all this cash, it's not doing anything, why don't we just lend it out? And get some interest for it, because not every depositor is going to claim their deposits and want to convert it into cash anyway, straight away, yes. Gilders is just a currency, it's like dollars. It's actually the Dutch term for. Uh, for the local currency. Forget about Gorgonzola. That's, that's, that's just, uh, you know, for all the goods and services that are being produced in the economy, it's, it's all about the currency right now, right? So the, the government's issued a million units of the currency. And it's all deposited in the bank accounts. And now we're just looking at the consolidated bank balance sheets. Are you OK with it? Um, so the bank realises, OK, we've got, um, we've got all this money sitting there, it's not doing anything, that's not very helpful. So let's suppose that on average 10% of the deposits are actually being converted into currencies, so we only need to hold 10% of the currency, um, and we can therefore loan out 90% of those million guilders, 900,000 guilders, to people who want to, Uh, who want to, uh, take out a loan, um, and of course that's attractive to the bank because they can charge interest on that loan, right, and make a profit. Um, and so this is what happens here is that the 900,000 guilders, 90% of the original 1 million, are being lent out, um, but of course, uh, The people who take out the loan are then going to, uh, they have that money. Why? Because, well, they took out the loan in the first place so that they can, for example, invest, right? So they spend the money and then whoever gets the money from that expenditure is going to again deposit the money in the banks, um, and so we have. Not just the 900,000. Loans that were created, but those are going to be deposited. By the recipients of the spending that was affected with that 900,000 gilders, that's going to be deposited in the banks and so the consolidated bank balance sheet, once again is going to be, Equal as it has to be, it has to be the same on both sides, so you've got 1,900,000 gilders here and 1,900,000 gilders there, OK? And now the bank can do exactly the same thinking again, they say, oh look, OK, we've got, Nearly 2 million gilders here in deposits, not everyone's gonna come and walk through the door and want to convert it into cash. You're still sitting on a million dollars or or gilders of cash. It's not doing much, why don't we loan out a little bit more, um, again, let's say we just keep 10% of, The value of the deposits as cash, um, and so now they can do the same calculation again, keep 10% of the 1.9 million guilders and loan out 810,000 guilders and make even more profit because they're going to hopefully get some interest on that loan and so on, right? And you can see very quickly that this multiplies up the original. Uh, uh, money supply, um, and you can actually calculate exactly what it's going to, what it's going to be, um, The ratio between bank reserves to bank deposits is just going to be equal to the desired reserve deposit ratio, right? So if it's 10% here, what is going to be the the overall eventual uh bank balance? Anyone? Well it's just gonna be multiplied up by a factor of 10, right? So if you start off with a with a million, you're gonna end up with 10 million. Uh, plug in some different numbers and you will get the same thing. Um, OK, so this is the standard story that's told in textbooks, almost universally. It's the money multiplier process. Underlying the money system and so you can see here that um, You know, a broad monetary aggregate is going to be. Much bigger than the original currency, right? So the currency here is 10%. A broad monetary aggregate is gonna be, uh, it's gonna be the 100%, so it's gonna be 10 times bigger than than the actual original currency. So that seems to get somewhat close in numbers to what I was showing you in the data earlier. The problem with this basic story of how the fractional reserve banking system works using this money multiplier process is that it's wrong. It's just not how the banking system works and it's frustrating that the literature, especially at sort of the principles level hasn't really caught up with reality. If you talk to bankers, if you talk to central bankers, they will. Try to point out, admit whatever that this is not a good description of what's happening, and if you think about it, It doesn't really sound very intuitive, because what are the banks doing here? They're only ever lending out if they have surplus cash, right? So the bank managers sitting there in the in the. I don't know, in on the ground floor, um. And then someone comes in the, comes through the door and says I'd be interested in a loan, and the bank says, oh, hold on, let me go into the vaults and check whether I've got enough cash. And then they go into the vaults and say, oh yeah, we have got enough cash, sure, yeah, I'll give you a loan. Does that sound right? That's not what happens. Now banks do not have to go into their vaults first to check whether they've got enough cash. Actually, the process is exactly the other way around. So What banks do is they're happy to create or give out a loan. If there is someone knocking on their door asking for a loan, and the bank deems them to be creditworthy. Like if there's someone coming up with a really great project that looks like a safe bet, and the bank thinks they can make. You know they can make a good deal by giving out that loan. The bank does not have to check whether it's got the requisite funds in the vaults in order to generate that loan. What does the bank do? It's got a computer, and with that computer it's just going to create a a loan on this with a few keystrokes, and the process of that, of creating that loan, it also creates the deposit, which of course is the money that. The borrower wants in order to be able to spend it for an investment or whatever it is, right? So So really, the causation is, if anything, the other way, it's not that loans create, sorry that that deposits create loans, which is sort of what the original story seems to suggest, right, namely that people have to deposit first, and then there's the surplus cash which is then lent out, but it's the other, the other way around that loans are created if the bank feels like, Those are useful profitable loans, and there is demand for loans. And those loans are then essentially created in the same process as a deposit is created. So that the loan deposit is always created as a pair, and that's crucial, right? Money is always created as a debt money pair. You can do that, it seems kind of weird, right, because you're essentially creating money out of nothing, but that's exactly what's happening. In the modern age of computers, you can do just that. You don't have to go down in the vaults to check whether you've got surplus cash. You just create a new account. And of course, the balance, the bank balance sheet always has to be balanced, it has to be the same on both sides. But that's easy enough to do. With an electronic balance sheet, create the loan account on the one side and create the deposit account on the other side, and then the borrower can use whatever funds have been deposited in the in the in the in the uh deposit account. And if the bank for some reason needs, Reserves, it needs currency. Because, say, suddenly there's an unusual number of people who are coming through the door and want to convert their deposits into currency. Then the bank will figure out a way to get that currency. But it doesn't have to rely on the availability of that currency in its vaults in order to Generate a loan in the first place. This may sound subtle. But it's But it's important because it highlights also, I think, to a greater extent, the limited control that the central bank has over the money supply. Because in the story that I told you here before, the standard textbook story, you could say, OK, through the money multiplier process, the central bank, because there is this money this, you know, money just multiplies up based on whatever the currency in circulation is, the central bank can directly control the overall money supply by changing the amount of currency in circulation. It's just not how it works. The banks are going to create money if the economy is booming and there are a lot of firms that want to invest and they knock on the banks' doors and want to borrow, the banks are going to give them loans, independent of what the central bank is doing. And as I said, if they do require currency, The banks to effect some kind of interbank payments or whatever, they're gonna find ways and it may be that they have to turn to the RBA or the central bank, but the RBA will will provide whatever liquidity the banking system needs because it under no circumstances it wants that's the, the um the payment system, uh, somehow haemorrhages or or or or experiences any kind of glitches, OK? So this is obviously OK, so this is just essentially a review of of some of the reading that I want to give you, um, you don't have to know it in every little detail, but it is, I think, important to have a proper. Realistic understanding of how the banking system works, rather than the false story that's peddled in many of the textbooks, unfortunately. Is everyone clear about that? Yes.

SPEAKER 2
It's like everyone's like asking for to like get the cash out and if the bank.

SPEAKER 1
Right, so if. But that's true, that's, that's true in the old story as well, right? If there is a, say, let's just call it a bank run, which is what we normally call it, if a large number of people are suddenly going to the bank and want to convert their deposits into cash, then the bank will not be able to oblige. And that's true in the. Standard money multiplier story as well as the correct banking story. So what does the bank, what does the bank then do if it suddenly doesn't have enough cash and there are all these people wanting to convert their deposits into cash? What is the bank going to do? I Why But they can't, but they can't print currency, remember? So all these people, they've got their deposit accounts and they want they wanna convert it into cash. They, they commercial banks don't print cash, so what do they do, yeah. They try to get more currency from elsewhere, not necessarily just from the reserve Bank. They may go to another bank, for example, say, hey, we've got all these silly people who think that you know they need to convert their deposits into cash, can you lend us some money in the short run and the. Bank may say yes, so they may obtain their funds that way, or they may go to the central bank and obtain the funds that way. Correct. Um, OK, so So whilst the central bank does not have control over. It does not have direct control over a significant proportion of the money supply, it does have indirect control. In particular, So let's, let's, let's talk through this process. Since, since we're here already. So suppose I'm Westpac. And I, I have to balance my books, I have to settle my balances at the end of every trading day. And at the end of the trading day, I realised that there were many more withdrawals than there were deposits, and so now I can't quite meet the requirements to settle the books. I need to obtain some high powered money, high powered money is another word for for central bank reserves or currency, essentially. So, what do I do? Right, so legally I have to settle my, I, I have to settle my books, otherwise I, I'm in violation of my banking charter and I can be closed down very quickly, so I have to find, The cash, essentially. What do I do? Where do I get it from? Exactly, that's what we call the overnight market. Now what is the overnight market? Is it like the The noodle market that we have sometimes, here, that's just sort of the noodle night market. No. What is the overnight market? Yes. Right, so they, there, there are short term loans where overnight means that they're typically short term. They can be overnight, often they're a couple of days, sometimes up to a week or something like that, but they're short term loans of essentially central bank funds. So if I'm in need of say $10 million to balance my books as Westpac, I'm gonna call up my friend at Commonwealth Bank and say. Hey Lisa, you know, I need $10 million. Do you happen to have $10 million surplus? And Lisa says, no, sorry, we're kind of in the same situation as you. We're also short, so yeah, go ring somewhere else and so then I ring. William at ANZ Bank and William says, oh yeah, you know, it's funny that you ask, um, but yeah, I have $10 million in surplus. Um, now how does that contract then work, right? So the ANZ is willing to lend us Westpac $10 million. What are the terms of that loan? Well, it'll be close to the cash rate exactly, well, or actually the cash rate, the cash rate is the actual interest rate that is being charged between ANZ and and Westpac. Um, What does the central bank have to do with that? I mean, we always hear about the central banks sort of changing the. Cash rates, but didn't we just, Say that the cash rate is between ANZ and Westpac. Yeah. Um, yes, they may, but they need not necessarily, um, but, So let's put it this way, suppose I need $10 million and ANZ says, yeah, uh yeah, ANZ says, yeah, we're happy, we'll lend it to you for 7%. To which I'm going to say. Thanks but no thanks. Because Why am I not going to accept the 7%? Interest rate on that short-term loan from ANZ. Yes. Sorry, this was just between ANZ and me though, but remember, I'm actually in a bit of a hurry. I have to settle my books tonight. For legal reasons. Um, yeah. banks are sometimes Be like named a bar. A case. So that's right, so there, there, there is, it's, it's not a one shot game, so if you want to use terminology from game theory, right, it's not a one shot game but it's a repeated game, so I might well go to, to, to ANZ and say I think you're being a bit greedy, just like to remind you that at some stage in the future, Yeah, the roles may be reversed and presumably you don't want me to act in the same way. Um, but I always have a threat that I can use. And even if the ANZ insists on charging 7%. Exactly. I can actually, as a last resort turn to the RBA. And what is the interest rate that the RBA is gonna charge me? It's the cash rate. It's actually the cash rate target. So, um. Right, it's actually the cash rate target, so this is how the system works. So suppose this is the cash rate target. Uh, OK. No. This is funny. Why is it not showing you here? It's just funky. Weird It's not seeing this for some reason it's very strange. OK, I can't make it work. I'll check it again in the, in the break, um. So, what is the current cash rate target? You know, Sorry? Uh, no, that's the inflation target, right? But what is the, what is the current interest rate setting, essentially, the cash rates? It's often referred to as the cash rate or the overnight rate, but it's actually a cash rate target. What is the current Interest rate setting. It's 4.1%, right? So when the RBA says that the interest rate, the cash rate is 4.1%, it's actually the cash rate target. What this means is that the RBA would like when the banks trade amongst each other, to charge each other roughly that rate. Now, if a bank, in this case me, Westpac, in need of central bank reserves, if I cannot find a counterparty who's willing to lend me those $10 million at a reasonable price, I can turn to the RBA. And borrow from the RBA at the cash rate target plus 25 basis points. That's the penalty I have to pay for going to the RBA as opposed to finding a counterparty in the market. And likewise, someone who's got surplus funds can deposit those funds at the central bank, the RBA. It used to be that it was perfectly symmetric and the deposit rate at the RBA was this the cash target -25 basis points that was changed not too long ago to just the cash target minus 10 basis points, so it's asymmetric now. And when the RBA is changing the cash rate target, it is basically changing all that, right, it's changing the target by say 25 basis points and then lifting. The deposit rate as well as the borrowing rate accordingly. This is what's often referred to as a corridor system or channel system. It's a very simple and neat way for how the overnight overnight market is, is um organised, um, and increasingly more and more central banks that used to have slightly different systems are actually copying essentially that system because it's proven to work very well. Uh, if you look at the actual cash rates, the interest rates that the banks charge each other for their overnight loans, they are not necessarily exactly equal to 4.1% every night. They might be 4.12% or 4.08% or 4.13%. It wiggles down a little bit, but it's always pretty close around the 4.1% mark, uh, mark, right? So that's the overnight overnight market, um, and, and the overnight rate or the uh or the cash rate. Um, So the central bank does not have direct control over the majority of the money supply, but it has control over the terms of the overnight loans. In the overnight market. And so by changing those terms, it can in the medium to long run affect. How much credit is being issued and therefore also how much money is being issued, because remember, money in the banking system is always created as a debt money pair. So if the economy is booming and a lot of firms are borrowing, a lot of households are borrowing, right, what does that mean? A lot of money is created at the same time because money is created as a money debt payer. The balance sheets of the banks are lengthening, becoming longer and longer. If the central bank is not happy about that, if it's concerned about too much spending in the economy, what is it gonna do? It's going to raise the interest rate target. Over time, that means that presumably borrowing will fall. So there will be less loans taken out, less money created in the process, more loans that are retired, and with every, every time a loan is extinguished, money is destroyed in the process, and so then the balance sheets of the banks start to shorten. And so you can see how the business cycle. You can also see to some extent in the length of the bank's balance sheets as they tend to widen and narrow over time. So Again, just understanding this process, I think helps you appreciate a little bit the, Degree to which the central bank can control, Macroeconomic activity. It's, it's in a rather indirect way, and so maybe this also then makes it less surprising that there are some long and variable lags in monetary policy. We already talked about that a few weeks ago, that it can take anywhere between 6 and 20 months or so for change in the interest rate to actually work its way through to uh inflation and and other macro variables. OK, let's take a break here, right? Uh, 10 minutes and then we'll resume our discussion. Sure, not about the money, but it's about the solo model. If I have a draught that has um. Alright, let's continue, um, it's really annoying that the document reader's not working, I've pushed every button, but I can't get it to work, um, because I was gonna write a few things down, so I have to do some hand waving and then maybe defer the written stuff to tomorrow. Is uh what we've talked about so far clear or are there any remaining questions? OK. Fine. Um So why do we spend so much time talking about money because money is a proxy for overall spending, right, because you can only spend if you've got money. Um, and, As a policy maker, central bank in particular, you care about how much spending is taking place in the economy, or how much spending potential there is, because that's going to determine, What the business cycle is going to do and possibly also affect inflation and so on, um, so that's why we keep a close look on the money supply. If money was in some ways totally unrelated to what goes on in the rest of the economy, it might be interesting, but nothing, nothing more, might not be relevant for policy purposes. So As you are no doubt aware, for central bankers in particular, there is often the primary concern that money is closely related to inflation or prices, in particular, that inflation is caused by excessive money growth. Now this discussion then quickly becomes messy because we are not necessarily keeping a close tab of what monetary aggregate we're looking at and whether it's um. You know whether we're focusing on currency now or broad aggregate of money that's actually being created by the by the central bank, um, let's just forget about that let's just think about money generically, right? um let's assume it's all under direct control of the of the government somehow, OK, and, and not worry about that most of it is actually created by the commercial banks, um, so then. We can We can think about how money is related to the rest of the economy, and this brings us to a simple equation which is actually an identity, an identity is an equation that must hold by definition, it cannot be violated, it's like a, like a balance sheet. Um, and that identity is referred to as the quantity equation of money, and it just says very simply. Suppose there is a million dollars of transactions that are taking place in the economy. Right, the value of the transactions that take place in the economy within a certain period, say, let's say 1 year is a million dollars. That means that because every transaction uses money, by assumption, then there must be enough money in order to enable those transactions worth a million dollars. OK, so one option is that there is $1 million worth of notes and coins in circulation. Remember, I'm not concerned about bank accounts now or anything like that. I'm just thinking of money as notes and coins, notes and coins and nothing else. So. So there must be $1 million worth of notes and coins that are in circulation. And they're each used one time and then that $1 million is exactly equal to the total value of the transactions that are being affected in the economy in that period, OK? That's what the identity says. That's the quantity equation. There is one slight Twist to that, namely, What if we only have, say, $500,000 worth of notes and coins in circulation? How can we make The quantity equation of money work. How can we make it hold? Well, all we have to then assume is that each dollar on average of notes and coins is used twice within that period, because right, it can be used 2 times or multiple times to affect transactions in a certain period. That is what we refer to as the velocity of money, the frequency with which, A unit of the currency is used for transactions within a certain period. How big is the velocity? Depends on where you go, country, time period, and so on. You know, the typical numbers are somewhere between 4 and 8 or something like that. So it's easy to imagine, again, when you've got notes and coins, you can imagine that a coin is being used, say, 4 times on average for transactions within a year or something like that. Uh So, We can define the velocity as simply being equal to the value of the transactions divided by the money stock. So if the value of the transactions is equal to a million dollars, as I said before, and the total money stock, That's the value of the notes and coins that are outstanding in circulation is 500,000, then the velocity is 2. If the money stock is 250,000, then the velocity is 4 and so on. OK? Now we then, Make another assumption. For the purposes of the quantity equation and that is. That The value of transactions is equal to the value of everything that's being produced in the economy. So we're ruling out any kind of Informal activity, non-market activity. But remember our definition of GDP assumes just that anyway, right? Assumes that everything that's being produced is transacted on, on markets, and we can keep track of that. And so the value of transactions is just equal to nominal GDP in that case. Nominal GDP GDP is just equal to. Real GDP times the price level, right, and so that's how we end up with, uh, With this Quantity equation. Obviously you can solve it for any of the four variables, right? Let's put the M over to the left-hand side so that we have M times V is equal to Px Y. OK, so we've got nominal GDP on the right-hand side, and on the left-hand side we've got the stock of money M times the velocity V. Again, it's an identity it must hold, you cannot violate it. Based on our simple assumptions. Does it match the data? Well, hm, uh, that sort of depends, um, but, This equation which was originally, Used just for descriptive purposes or statistical purposes really. Has over time in the middle of the 20th century morphed into Uh, into a theoretical equation, and also with some normative, uh, um, Yeah, I guess with a with a normative dimension. In particular, what was often argued was that, Velocity in the short run typically doesn't change very much. Right, um. Velocity typically doesn't change very much. Because what determines velocity, well, that tends to be, Sort of more structural features of the economy, so for example, what the payment system looks like, so how, you know, that's gonna determine how frequently a unit of currency is being used and so on. So if you think about V as being constant in the short run, And let's also assume that Y is constant for the moment, I'll say something about that in a moment. Well then you can see straight away that P and M. Respond proportionately to one another. Right, if V is constant and Y is constant or exogenous, then what happens when you double M? You double P. If you quadruple M, you quadruple P. and so on, OK, so M and P in that case are strictly proportional. And that is essentially the basis for uh a macroeconomic theory called monetarism. Closely associated with Milton Friedman from the Chicago school because he was saying precisely this, if you want to control inflation, Just look at the quantity equation, you will see that prices are directly linked to the money supply. You as a central bank are responsible for the money supply, so control the money supply and you will control the price level or or the change in the price level, therefore inflation. That's obviously a slightly perhaps slightly bastardised or simplified caricature of monetarism, but it's, yeah, I think it gets to the essence of it. So there are a couple of assumptions here, right? Uh. Which ones are they? Or what, what do you think are crucial assumptions? For that story, for the monetarist story to work. Yeah. Y remains constant, OK, so not necessarily just that Y remains constant, but importantly, that if you change M, You do not change Y, right? So not necessarily that Y remains constant, but that Y is exogenous. In other words, Y does not respond tom. Now this is a, this may seem sound a little bit abstract. And I would write the stuff down, unfortunately, like I said, the document reader doesn't work, so. Maybe do it quickly tomorrow morning, um. This refers to a somewhat abstract concept in macroeconomics that is referred to as the classical dichotomy. This idea that the real side of the economy is separate from the nominal side of the economy. So what do we mean by the real side of the economy? The real side of the economy is what we ultimately care about. It's real quantities, preferences, technology, prices, uh uh not prices, sorry, um um um um it was that preferences, technology, quantities, and so on, um. Essentially, everything that we care about in an economy that we could, for example, analyse within the barter system without any reference to money or nominal prices, right, that's what we call the real side of the economy. It's a little bit abstract I understand that, but it's, it's, it's a useful shortcut to to understand. Uh, what's going on. The nominal side of the economy is everything to do with money and nominal prices. By nominal prices we mean the dollar prices as opposed to the relative prices, right? Because That's essentially all arbitrary. Right, I go to Australia and a litre of milk's gonna cost me $1 50s. I go to uh Zimbabwe and a litre of milk costs me $1500 in local currency. Yeah, we understand that those are just labels. Because there's a lot more money outstanding in Zimbabwe than there is uh there are, than there is money in, in Australia, and so, uh, the price of litre of milk here is different than a price a litre of milk has in Zimbabwe. So the classical dichotomy says that the nominal side of the economy is separate from the real side of the economy. In other words, if I change M as a policymaker, because that's what I have some control over, if I have M, if I change M and the classical dichotomy holds, nothing is gonna happen to the real side of the economy. I'm not gonna change output, I'm not gonna change people's consumption behaviour, I'm not gonna change investment behaviour. The only thing I'm going to change is prices. The nominal side does its thing, the real side does its thing. That's what the classical dichotomy says, and closely related. To the classical dichotomy, it's essentially the same, it's really the same thing, just, um, Yeah, just from a slightly different or look through at a different lens is this idea of monetary neutrality. I, I'm putting these terms out there because, If you engage in these kind of discussions with other macroeconomists, you're likely to encounter them at some stage, so I wanna make sure that you know what they are. So monetary neutrality is nothing other than, Classical dichotomy looked at from a policy maker's perspective, right, I am the central bank and I'm thinking what is money going to do? If I tinker with the money supply, am I going to affect the real side of the economy, or am I only going to tinker with prices? Right, if changing the money supply only has effect on prices, then money is said to be neutral, neutral in the sense that it doesn't do anything to the real side of the economy. If money is non-neutral, that's just another way of saying that the classical dichotomy is broken. Right, then I can change the money supply and it is going to affect output in some way. So that would be, for example, right, if, if, if um. If the classical dichotomy does not hold, in other words, if money is non-neutral, then suppose I double M, then, The consequence might be that P does not double, perhaps it increases by 50%, but Y also increases by a certain amount, right? So if you see that Y. Increases in response to an increase in M, you can you know straight away that the classical dichotomy did not hold, money was not neutral. And that's not what typically, um, certain group of economists like monitorists or whatever think. So this is one area where there is disagreement among macroeconomists, is to what extent does the classical dichotomy hold? To what extent is money neutral or not? I've Mentioned this before and I'm going to do more of this now that we're starting to talk about about business cycle theory. There are two broad schools of thought in in macroeconomics, right? 85%, it's a number that I've just plucked out of thin air, I have no idea how many. But let's say 85% of economists fall into one or the other of these two big camps. I call that broadly the mainstream, right? The other 15% are more on the fringes, and of course it's not binary, it's not black and white, there's a lot of overlap, but, um, and so those two main schools of thought are, what do you think? Sorry? Chicago, we could call it Chicago, um, yeah, it's so I'll, I'll broadly refer to it as neoclassical, um, neo so Chicago would be some version of neoclassical, um, monetarism would fall under that as well, but you know, it's like, you know, many different churches within that within that big church, um. Then there's also so called real business cycle theory or RBC theory for example, which we will probably also put under, under uh under neoclassical. OK, so that's one of the major schools of thought and the other big mainstream school of thought is. Keynesian, exactly, so, so let's just broadly dichotomize between these two big schools of thought, um. And I think it's useful to be clear about that, so you understand when you read about economics or you witness discussions and conversations or whatever. You have an understanding of where people are likely to come from and and and what the model is that they have in their head. Now, what are some of the key distinctions between Keynesians and neoclassicals? That you're aware of. Sorry? The role of government, exactly, that's one of the key policy conclusions or implications that, uh, you know, they, they differ between these two schools of thought and specifically, That's right, but which, which school of thoughts. Right, OK, so broadly speaking, and this is again, right, just to be clear, it's a caricature, it's it's much more nuanced in reality and so on, but again, caricatures are useful because they capture some basic essence. Keynesians by and large. Are in favour of some kind of government intervention, neoclassicals are not. Another way to say this is that neoclassicals have strong faith in the ability of markets to self-correct. Or they are, or they believe that markets can correct, self-correct reasonably quickly. And so there's no point for governments or no need for governments to get involved. Keynesians argue that markets do not work so well in the long run, most Keynesians would actually say yes, markets do a good job in the long run, but in the short run, they may not perform very well. There may be inefficiencies. There may be inequities, there is sand in the wheels, whatever, right? Different, different theories of how markets may not work so well, and consequently, There may be a need for governments to intervene to alleviate the inefficiencies that markets. Exhibit in the short run. Right, in other words, government intervention can can improve the overall outcome. This is essentially the key battleground between Keynesians and neoclassicals. Should governments intervene because markets are not doing as well as they ought to? Or should governments stay out? Right, so. As I said, most Keynesians are happy to embrace the idea that in the long run, Markets are gonna do OK. The key difference is the short run. Now the short run is not defined by a specific number of years, or quarters or whatever. The short run can be a year, it could be 5 years or whatever, right, that's. No, it's, yeah, it's, it's arbitrary, um, but thinking about, Our quantity equation now. Which school of thought is more likely to embrace the idea that the, that the classical dichotomy holds, And which school of thought is more likely to embrace the idea that the classical dichotomy does not hold? Exactly, Keynesians would say it doesn't hold, at least in the short run, in the long run they'd say probably yes, it's gonna wash out over time, right, whatever inefficiencies, whatever sand was in the wheels of the markets, eventually that just washes out in the long run, but in the short run, yes, there are inefficiencies in the markets, and governments are likely to be able to, Intervene and make things better, right? How do you know that? Well, if the classical dichotomy holds in the short run as well. What does that mean? It means that when you change M, all you're doing is changing P. You cannot change Y if the classical dichotomy holds in the short run. So there's no point of having government intervention because it's ineffective. You only wanna, as a Keynesian, you would only advocate government intervention if you think it's effective, and in order to be able, in order to believe that it's effective, you have to assume that the classical dichotomy at least breaks in the short run. In other words, money is non-neutral in the short run, you can, you can affect the economy, do something, right? Is that, does that make sense? Cool. We'll have a few other dimensions along which we can compare neoclassicals and Keynesians over time, right? And again, I'm uh keep apologising, but it's annoying that I can't write this stuff down at the moment. Um, So Did Friedman just pluck the stuff out of thin air, like I said originally, the quantity equation was a statistical description. Um Friedman, together with Anna Schwartz in the 1950s, wrote a famous book. On monetary economics, which was primarily, A pretty a theoretical statistical exercise, and he did this kind of stuff where he said, OK, well, look at what's going on, if we compare, Money growth rates to inflation, we see that there is a very high correlation between the two. And at the same time, when we compare money growth rates to real output growth, we see that there's practically no correlation. So This is where Friedman would just say, OK, well that's, that just proves our, our, our quantity equation. With the classical dichotomy, right? V, yeah, doesn't change much. Y is more or less exogenous, so if there is much change in M, that's just going to be reflected in changes in P and no change in Y. And that's what these graphs here basically tell us. But you can see that, OK, so by, by um by again by macro standards, these are extremely high correlations, and so this is something that most economists would subscribe to. Uh, the question is again, the time horizon, right? So these numbers don't know exactly, but they're likely to be over an extended period of time rather than short run of a couple of years. And that's, and hence again, why there is disagreement among economists, whether, whether we should think that money growth only affects inflation in the short run or whether it also has effects in the long run. OK. Everyone clear about that? So, again, as I said, we, we talked about M here and I I said I'm gonna forget about. Whether this is M1 or M2 or M3 or currency, let's just abstract from that. In reality, of course that matters to the extent that the central bank is not directly controlling a broad aggregate of money, it's only controlling the currency supply directly, which is a small proportion of broad money, and it can only indirectly affect broader monetary aggregates over time by controlling the terms of the overnight market. Um, OK, so. So the RBA, we've talked about it before, um, has two main responsibilities. One is the responsibility for monetary policy, as we mentioned before, and it does this typically by changing the cash rate target, in other words, influencing the level of interest rates in the economy overall, and it also has, and this is actually equally important, but happens much more in the background, we only really. Find out about this additional role that the RBA performs when things go horribly wrong, like 15 years ago during the global financial crisis, it has oversight and regulation of the financial markets. It has to ensure that the banks are operating soundly, the financial system more generally is operating soundly, the payment system is running smoothly. The payment system is a really important part of. The financial system, it's basically ensuring that every time there is any kind of financial transaction, it, there's absolutely no glitch, there's no hiccup with that transaction. Uh, when. If for example, say terminals break down or the payment system breaks down even for half an hour. Let alone longer, that can very quickly have dramatic effects. Major downstream ripple effects in the rest of the financial system, so it's, it's kind of like the engine room of the financial markets you have to make sure that it keeps running smoothly and the central, it's not a very sexy job you don't hear about it, you hear about it when it's not working when it's working it's just kind of humming along fine down in the basement and. And and no one pays attention to it, but it's an important part of what the RBA is is doing, right? Um, So nowadays the, uh, nowadays monetary policy is basically set by targeting this interest rate, the cash rate that I was mentioning before, um and let me just mention here that um, So this is uh it's a fair bit of repetition, um, that. Of course, the cash rate is, as we said before, sorry. The cash rate is an overnight rate. Now how many, How many of you actually are going to come in contact with that cash rates? Can you go to the bank and say I'd like to borrow at the overnight rates? Right, no. Remember that there are many different interest rates in the market. There is the market for overnight loans, there's a market for short term loans, middle term, medium term loans, long-term loans, there's interest rates for credit card loans, car loans, secured personal loans, unsecured personal loans, mortgages, um, you know, company loans, investment loan and I mean, you know, there's squillions of different kinds of interest rates for different kinds of loans, and those are the ones that are ultimately going to affect spending in the economy. The overnight market. Is a tiny fraction of what happens in the financial markets, and yet, somehow the central bank is able to, Exert an enormous control over the financial markets just by affecting that. Interest rate in that single small market. Um, and that's because all the interest rates tend to move together. Right? Essentially all the interest rates in the market are really benchmarked against that overnight rate because the overnight rate you can think of as being kind of think of it as a, as a, the raw short-term risk-free interest rate. And every other interest rates, if it carries a risk premium, for example, is always going to carry a risk premium over the cash rate, if it carries a term premium because it's for longer term loans, it's going to carry a term premium over the cash rate. And so the market rates are always related very closely to the cash rate, and you can see this in the data easily. So here, for example, you see the cash rate. You can see the cash rate really changes in steps because that's an exogenous policy change and then you've got the market rates for 1 month, 3 month, and 6 month bank accepted bills, so this is standardised, uh, short term loans, um, amongst banks within the within the banking system, um, and you can see just how closely they move together. Um. Like I said, you could add credit card. Interest rates, car loan interest rates, student loan interest rates, and so on, um, and they would all move closely together. OK, so in that sense, even though the central bank is only controlling that one interest rate. That's fine. It knows that it needs to affect all the other market interest rates, but it, it is able to do that, uh, quite, quite comfortably. Everyone OK with that? So nowadays the central bank indeed, um, Indeed sets the interest rate to set monetary policy. Um, it used to. Actually conduct monetary policy in a different way. Rather than setting the interest rate, it would directly on a continuous basis, control the money supply. And how does it control the money supply, and again this is where it'd be easier for me to have this on my document reader, um. is by By engaging in what we call open market operations. Because the central bank does not simply drop. Currency Onto the people from a helicopter, right, that's not how the money supply increases, how does the money supply increase, it has to be injected into the financial system, or how is it injected into the financial system? The central bank doesn't just go to the bank and say, here is some cash because we know you need it. No, it's the consequence of a financial transaction. In particular, The central bank goes to the market and says, I'm willing to buy some kind of asset that you have. And in exchange for that asset that I'm gonna buy off you, I'm gonna pay that with central bank money. Right? So that's what we call an open market purchase. The central bank purchases an asset from the private sector, typically banks, I mean, you and I don't really have the means to engage, nor the legal capability of engaging in open market operations, but. Um, that's beside the point. So the central bank says, OK, I will buy $10 million worth of assets from the, from the bank. And as I do that, I pay with central bank money, and now the money supply has increased by $10 million. Right, that's an open market purchase. An open market sale does exactly the opposite. I'm selling the assets. And you purchase them, you being the bank or the private sector, purchased them from me with central bank money, and that goes into my vaults and so the central bank, uh, the, the amount of money, the money supply has fallen by $10 million. What kind of assets? Would a central bank use? What is, what kind of assets is the RBA typically willing to buy? It's almost always, but not entirely government bonds because they are the safest assets, right? So most open market operations are. With government bonds, so the RBA purchases government bonds that the bank holds. And in the process increases the money supply if it's an open market purchase. On the other hand, it could go the other way and say, OK, I'm gonna sell government bonds. And so then I'm increasing the amount of government bonds in the market and reducing the money supply in the process. That's how monetary policy used to be done almost entirely, basically just, constantly changing the quantity of money that was being done in an exogenous way, it was always a constant er sort of a, A conscious policy decision, right, how much money to uh, Yeah, how much money to inject or withdraw from, from the banking system. Um, nowadays, bank, central banks still do open market operations because they at times still have to make sure that portfolios are appropriate and so on, they have to put some money in the in the markets, um, but nowadays they tend to just let the money supply respondogenously. In other words, they focus on the interest rate. They set the interest rates and then if a commercial bank, for example, wants to come and borrow from us, they want to borrow central banks from us, the reserve Bank, we will do that at the 25 basis point penalty, provided they can supply the appropriate amount of collateral. So it's like an open market operation, but it's not exactly the same thing, but it's, but it's similar, um, so. So monetary policy practise has changed quite a bit over the years. Like I said, there used to be much more focus on On the quantity of money and using the quantity of money as a policy instrument, nowadays there is much less emphasis on the quantity of money, but much more on the price or the interest rate as the policy instrument. And the reason for that is because. Money demand is very volatile, and so if you are trying to control the quantity, But you cannot predict what money demand is going to do, then the interest rate is going to be really volatile and financial markets do not like volatile uh volatile interest rates, so. If the price becomes really volatile as you're trying to control the quantity and you don't like that, well then you can just do the opposite and say, OK, I'm gonna set the price and let the quantity adjust endogenously and so the the quantity is, is, is fluctuating, but that's not much of a problem as long as the central bank is, is willing to accommodate whatever the needs are in the in the private sector. Um OK. Um, so you know this can easily get on, get a little bit technical, I understand that, um. You don't have to, it's, it's not about knowing every in and out of, of how the engine room works and, and there comes a point where I don't understand it myself either, not least because there's also the, the systems are evolving and they're different across countries and so on, um, but have a basic. Notion, have a basic understanding of how the central bank is setting the interest rates overnight, how that, Right, the sort of the corridor system, I mean that's nice and simple, how, The term structure means that if you affect the short run interest rate, you also affect all the other interest rates in the in the economy, including the long run interest rates. Um, and have an understanding that in principle you could also try to control the quantity, but that's gonna be, Probably inefficient, uh, given the volatility in the financial markets. Not least, it becomes difficult because remember that most of the money is actually is generated within the banking system by the banks. Well, If you as a central bank are printing money and trying to put, you know, if you're trying to tinker with the quantity and you're trying to put money into the banking system, but the banks don't really need it or want it, you're not changing anything, you're not affecting, Economic activity or purchasing power, so that's why you're better off, affecting the terms on which loans are generated in the, in the private sector. Um, OK, um. I think we might as well stop here and I will. Spend a little bit of time, I probably won't get to the labour market chapter tomorrow, that's OK, we'll do that um. Uh, week 8, try to wrap this up tomorrow then. Any questions? Yes. No, no, that's, they are government bonds, they are not. Central bank money, right, they're they're not part of the money supply, but it is kind of weird if you think about it because if you consolidate, The central bank balance sheets and the treasury because they are both government institutions, right? And you then consider open market operations with government bonds, you are just exchanging one government security against another government security right? so that is kind of weird, but they're not identical, they don't have exactly the same properties. One is money, it performs the functions of money and one is not money, it's an interest bearing security and so that's why it has. It actually has effects. Increasingly so. Um, right, the, the, the difference between money and government bonds, for example, is shrinking over time. Because you, you can now essentially, if you have money and deposit accounts for example, some of them are interest bearing, which means that the interest gap between government bonds and, and money is becoming smaller, um. There are, there are big funds that allow you to hold fractions of large portfolios of government bonds like money market accounts in the US say that's getting pretty close to money like behaviour in a way, right? So but they're still not exactly identical. Yes. See you tomorrow. Thanks.
