SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Alright, welcome back everyone. My apologies for the slight delay. I was looking at some calculations and some time got away from me. Um, today we're gonna be finishing our talk on consumer optimisation. Now we went through last time and spent a long time talking about this consumer's problem, and we set up the budget constraint and did all these things. This is a new slides cos I've made a small update in one spot. Um, and we talk about maximising utility and how we did that, using that idea of the indifference curve. For today, for the remainder of today, we're really just gonna be looking at this, the standard case, right, those nice bowed inwards, smooth indifference curves, um, because for most of our we, cos, well, when we think about individuals making choices, we tend to think that this is the normal case, right, that we, we really are working in the standard case of linear budget constraint. Nice bow in with in different curves. There are extreme cases, but that's not true, like clearly when we talk about left and right shoes, it's a perfect compliments. You can think of things that are very nearly perfect substitutes, but for most of our purposes this is gonna be what we work with. If we're working with a, a generic circumstance. And we got to the end last time with preference against diversity, which we did pretty quickly, but we did get through, um, and so I said today we were gonna talk about comparative stacks. So we're gonna do our changes in prices, changes in incomes, and do a bit of work around those. Uh, before we go forward then, are there any questions, any admin issues or things I should talk about before we start doing content? It's very loud. Cricket just there? Just crickets, cool, excellent. um. Very loud Um, so we want to talk about what happens when incomes and prices change. It's gonna turn out that changes in income are a lot easier to work with than changes in prices, which is why we're going to do changes in income first. Changes in income. In some ways are a lot more straightforward. Some of this you will have seen before or at least seen before to a certain extent, but some of it will be new. So we have two goods, let's call them, we're actually gonna talk about um, In a few different places today, so I'll start, no, I'll start doing it here. Good A, good B. And our nice budget constraint, which limits what we can purchase, and our person optimises by a person's gonna have our normal sort of indifference curves and they're gonna optimise by setting, by by picking the point on the budget constraint, where the budget constraint is tangent to the indifference curve because that maximises their, that maximises their utility. Difference curve 1, budget constraint 1, and they choose and consume at at bundle X. Right, some some amount of good A, some amount of good B. And then we have a price, then we have, sorry, an income change. And we're gonna say that our income gets smaller cos smaller is typically a bit easier to work with. There is some sort of shock to our model and the shock is our person now has smaller income. That's gonna be a nice parallel shift in our budget constraint for the reasons you might expect, because initially we had income over the price of good A, now we have our new income over the price of good A. We initially had income over the price of good B, now we have our new smaller income. Over the price it would be, because the incomes what's gotten smaller, both of the intercepts have been pulled in by the same proportion, right, if we halved our income, they're both halved, if 2/3 of our income, as we have here, we'd pulled in by 2/3, and so we're still on a nice parallel line here. Also, we can think of this as being a parallel line because our we would expect the slope of our budget constraint not to change because the slope of the budget constraint is that price ratio and the prices haven't changed, so we wouldn't expect this to change. Just gonna Try and find the cricket, the cicada that's in here somewhere, OK, it has stopped. It's very loud. Nope, never mind, um. And so we want to think about what happens to our consumption of our very our consumption of our goods. And so in some sense, so we're on a new budget constraint, we're gonna be looking for the new point point of the new budget constraint, where there's a new indifference curve that's that's just tangent to this budget constraint for our maximisation, and so we can, we can think of maybe, This is what our indifference curves look like, right, there's a whole bunch of indifference curves, we haven't drawn them all. And so in that circumstance, everything happens the way we would kind of expect in most cases for it to happen, we have our point Y here. The effect was that our income went down, that the quantity of good A that we consume went down. And the quantity of good beer we consumed also went down. If this is the kind of indifference curves that our person has. Any questions, problems? Things to add here, or we have more things to add, any questions, problems? What do we call goods? Where this happens. These are normal goods, right, these are our nice goods that we call normal goods. Here we have both A and B are normal goods because when our income went down, we chose to consume less of them. Normal goods here is a technical, if you would have heard this in micro one over and over again. Normal goods is a technical term, we're not saying that they're that they're standard or normal or like it's just using the word normal as a technical term. The reason why the word normal was chosen is because most goods are like this. Most goods unless they're weird in some way, are like this and so it's not unreasonable to call them norm to to pick normal as the technical term, but it's a technical term. It means when income goes down, we consume less of the good. Or when income goes up, we consume more of the good. It's what normal means. But that sort of discussion probably prefaces this idea that there are goods that are not normal, right, there are non-normal goods. What are the non-normal goods called in this context? Yeah, so the other goods are our inferior goods, which are goods where when your income goes down, you consume more of them. Right, these are slightly strange goods, again, they're they're non-normal, they're, we call them inferior, it is once again a technical term, we are not saying that they are bad. They're still goods, we still want more of them, we still gain utilities from having more of these things. But the rationale for why we might consume less of them when our income goes up is because they're in some sense not as nice in some way as the normal goods. So you see this with, you know, Low brown rice in a lot of countries is a is an inferior good. When people's income increases, they consume less brown rice because they consume more white rice, white rice is nicer, but it's more expensive, so you consume less brown rice as your income goes up. Brown rice is still good, you still like it, you would still like to have more of it, but with more income you have less brown rice with more white rice. So these things do exist. Graphically, What are we talking about? Ah, I'll leave this here actually. Graphically, what are we talking about for these kinds of goods? Well, it must be the case if, for example, good A isn't inferior good, it must be the case that when our income goes down, we choose to consume more of good A. I made this very hard for myself, so I might make this a little bit easier for myself. So it must be the case that when our income goes down, we consume more of good day. And that will be indicated by indifference curves that that means that indifferent curves has to be tangent sort of over here somewhere, because we're choosing to consume more of good A, we're choosing to consume at point Y. That's fine, right, that's totally consistent with this idea of, Inward sloping In different sorry, inward bending in different curves that are still smooth, everything's still fine. This is all reasonable and plausible, this is just our brown rice story, good A is a good A is our brown rice. When our income goes down, we unfortunately have to buy more brown rice. We're not super happy about that, but we wanna have enough food, so we buy more brown rice, we buy less white rice. If her income goes down further. We buy more brown rice. Right, these things are consistent with the idea of inward bending smooth curves. You'll notice this won't be the case if we have someone asked last week, asked someone about these things, do do these curves have to be parallel? No, if you had if all these different curves were parallel, you wouldn't have inferior goods. Um, but these are still possible and everything's fine, and A is inferior good. B here is clearly a normal good. As our income goes down, we're consuming less and less of good B. So here, A is inferior. B is normal. You could flip this around. And make it so that A is normal and B is interior, pretty easily, right, you just have to tweak how you how the how the indifference curves look. So that should be OK. Before I take to do the next part, any questions, questions, concerns? Problems. Here, inferior goods no goods, yes. That is the next point. That's the point we're gonna do over here. So let's think about, Let's think about both goods being inferior. So that means that when our income goes down. When our income goes down, We're gonna consume less. Sorry, when income goes down, we're gonna consume more of both goods. Right, that would mean an income goes down, our quantity of good A goes up, and our quantity of good B goes up. Cause inferiority means when your income goes down, your quantity cans you guys up. Something goes wrong here, we can see graphically, hopefully we can see graphically, that something's going wrong here. We started off at BC1, budget constraint one, we're now restricted to budget constraint 2. And we just don't have an opportunity here for both goods to be inferior, right, good A being inferior. Means that as our income goes down, we consume somewhere over here. That's fine, right, there's there's there's budget constraint that's available for us to consume for good A being inferior. Could be being inferior. Means that as our income goes down, we consume somewhere up here. And that's fine because there's budget constraint available that we can consume for good B being inferior. But for both goods being inferior, clearly they're just, we just can't have that, right, we can't both consume more we would have to be, we would have to be up in like both goods being inferior, consuming more of both goods, and that's not available to us, right, we can't afford to do that. Um, so it's not possible for both goods to be inferior, it just isn't mathematically a thing that can happen, um. Without talking about the graph, you can hopefully reason out that both goods, we can't have a situation where both goods are inferior. Because if both goods are inferior, that means our income goes down, we buy more of both things, that means we're spending more money on both things. How can we possibly spend more money on both goods when we have less money to spend? Right, so very naturally this just doesn't happen. This thing here, both goods and inferior, is not possible. If you wanted to extend this argument out to more than 2 goods, it's hopefully not that complicated to see that you can't have a situation where all goods are inferior. You can certainly have multiple inferior goods, right, you had 17 goods you were choosing from, it could be that 7 of them were inferior, it's just that you can't have all 17 be inferior. There has to be something that you buy less of to allow for the fact that you buy more of the inferior good when your income falls. You can do all this as well with um income increases, we've just done it as as income reductions. So when normal for normal goods as your income goes up, you buy more of it, so Q sub D is quantity demanded here, and for inferior goods as your income goes up, you buy less of it. That's definitionally what these things mean, and both are possible, right? Most goods are normal goods, some goods are inferior goods. Any questions, questions, problems, graphically here. All OK. Excellent. Might even finish early. In that case, we can talk about price changes. Uh, and so the, the, as I said, the harder one in some sense, the harder one is the, what happens when we talk about changes in price. So I'm using rice here as the good. I want to think about what happens to consumption of rice as the price of rice increases. So our goods are gonna be, I'm gonna actually use rice and pasta as my, as my typical two goods that are partial substitutes. We have our budget constraint, as always. Yeah, I'm doing an increase, good. We have our budget constraint, as always, we have our, In different curve, we have our we have our difference curve that we're actually consuming on, given that budget constraint. Make sure I don't have that doing the wrong thing there. And there's this whole other collection of indifference curves that we don't draw, right, keep in mind these are all here. We just don't These are all here, we just don't draw them because, It Clutters the graph But all those indifference curves are there. We're then gonna increase the price of rice, we increase the price of rice, our budget constraint changes in a way that's very natural and hopefully it's pretty straightforward, which is we have that pivot inwards of that budget constraint, because the, the maximum amount of price uh of of pasta that we can buy doesn't change, but the maximum amount of rice that we can buy does change. So the short answer of this is like the short, the short version of the answer here is reasonably straightforward. I actually have two graphs, I'm not sure why I have that. The short version of this answer is pretty straightforward, is that there's gonna be some point over here somewhere where we're in which maybe here, where we're indifferent, we're on our new indifference curve. IC 2 and point Y. Is the octagon. Right, is the short answer. There's a longer answer, the longer answer is the one we'll talk about now. Um, any question, any concerns though with the short answer? The new point that's that's. Tangent to the indifference, where the indifference curve is tangent to the budget. The longer answer is, there's really two effects going on here. We can, or at least we can we can um decompose the effect of this price change into two effects. And we've talked about these in micro one but now we're gonna be able to graph them and talk about them a bit more, a bit more rigorously, uh we talk about these as our substitution. And our income. Effects So these are our two effects, because there really are in some sense two things going on here. There's a change in the relative prices of the goods, right, rice is relatively more expensive compared to pasta. But also our person here is much worse off, right, they've gone from IC 1 from from having that that nice utility that they were getting from indifference curve one to this much worse utility on indifference curve 2. Um, so they've become relatively speaking much worse off. And we talk about that as that as the income effect is becoming much worse off. We might sometimes describe that as the real income effect, right, their bundles of goods that they can afford has gotten a lot smaller. So again, substitution effect is just the effect from that change in relative prices. Income effects is the change due to the change in consumption due to the reduction in utility, due to the reduction in real income, in what you can actually afford to buy. And we want to divide those two things, so substitution effect is gonna be just from the change in prices, income effect is from the, Real or the change in you if you like, the change in. Utility, this big triangle. If you're not aware, this is like what, why is he drawing a triangle and saying change in? The big triangle is the Greek letter D, right, it's a delta, and so it's a change. So this, this letter here, if you've not, if you're not on board with this, this letter here means change. So one is change in price, one is change in utility. So let's go to our graph and try and think about these things a little bit more carefully, specifically as a change in change in price. The, the effects from the change in price and then the effect from the change in utility. Um, let's actually, let's, let's go back a little bit. It's like one second and say what we might expect to have happen. Before we do the, before we do the graph and see what happens, what might we expect to have happen. As the price of rice increases relative to the price of pasta, what would we expect to happen to the demand for rice, the amount of rice that we want to buy? We have someone saying down, we have any takers on, any takers for up? It takes it down. Cool, excellent, right, that we, we consume less rice. Rice is more expensive, we buy less of it. Um, but the income effect is where things are a bit more, uh, uh, where things are a bit more complicated, a bit more interesting. Because for the income effect, It's gonna depend. Right, it's gonna depend on whether our good is a normal good or an inferior good. And so maybe this is gonna go up, right, if this is normal, so our our change of utility here is a reduction in utility, so we're relatively poorer, um, so a normal good wouldn't mean that we consume less of the good as well because we're relatively poorer. But if, if rice is an inferior good for this particular person, then we might buy more of it. And so it's not necessarily clear whether it's not necessarily clear what's going to happen from this price change, because there are potentially conflicting effects. Not necessarily, but potentially conflicting effects. So when we have this price change, we have our two effects. So, so, and, and so that's what we're gonna, that's what we're gonna see. Um, let's go to our graphs then. So the first thing we wanna do is our substitution effect, the effect only from the change in price, which means we want a whole utility constant. Initially we were able to consume the utility that we get from any 0.1 difference curve one. We want to change the price ratio, but still be able to consume on a different curve 1. And so what we're looking for is, so this is our, this is our price ratio, the slope of this budget too, that's our price ratio. And so what we want to find is that we want to look for, That same price ratio. Call this, I think techs often calls this BC prime, that same price ratio, but where we would have, we would be able to consume at our initial utility level. And so if this was the new price ratio, but we could still consume like IC one, then we would choose to consume call this Z. So Z to Z prime is just the substitution effect, it's just the effect from the change in change in prices, but holding utility constant, holding if you like, real income constant rather than holding nominal income constant. And Getting a little bit messy, but this is as messy as it has to be. This is actually quite handy, um. So this change is our substitution effect. We consume less rice. Which is not, hopefully, fingers crossed, not massively surprising. Similarly, we get the substitution effect when we talk about pasta, we're consuming pasta is now relatively cheaper, because rice is relatively more expensive. And so for pasta we also see, and I'll get rid of this immediately, but we also see our substitution effect for pasta because we buy more pasta. Cos it's relatively cheaper. But we'll focus on rice for the time being. So substitution effect is we buy more, is we buy less, buy less rice. Questions, questions, problems, concerns. Yes. The amount of rice we're wanting always goes down irrespective of it. Substitution effect will always reduce the amount of rice because the substitution effect all we care about is the change in relative prices and rice is relatively more expensive, so we're gonna buy less rice. Um, you can think of this using the, the marg rate substitution equals the price ratio argument, you can make an argument through that to get to this out to get telecom. Um, you can make an argument through the, which is equivalent to, um, marginal utility per dollar spent, has to be equal, um, you can get that from there as well. OK, lovely. The income effect then is the rest, right, is the change in our rice consumption purely due to the change in income. And so here, the way that I've drawn this is. Not necessarily clear which way it is, um, but, This is the rest, right, we go from Z from Z to Y. And so that the rest of the change, that is our. Income effect, it's not due to any change in prices, it's pure so Z to to Y. That's the same price ratio. Because BC is parallel to BC2. Same price ratio, it's just a change in income, and here we see that we consume a little bit less rice. So here in this particular instance, our rice is a normal good, our rice is acting as a normal good because when our income went down, we consumed less of it. And the total effect then. Let's go blue. The total effect is the sum of these things. The substitution is just change in prices, income is the residual change due to the change in income, and the total effect is, is both of these things together. Questions, questions, concerns, problems. This was food wise being a normal good, we can hopefully easily, let's see if I can be very sneaky with how I do this. I'm gonna bring this back. I just wanna have a few less things. For now. We can also graphically see inferiority, inferior goods are completely fine, this is probably why I have the 2nd 2nd spot here. Um, because. I did kind of make this that way already, um. And so if this was the graph that we had, where Z was a little bit to the right, sorry, a little bit to the left of Y as it is here now, you can tell from my, my very fancy diagram, that's definitely the scale. Our substitution effect. Is the change just due to that change in prices? And then the income effect is the rest. The fact is the rest is that increase is that change in rice just due to the change in income, right, that shift down of income, that parallel shift down of income. And the total effect then is. For some of these things. This is clearly rice being inferior. Rice is acting as an inferior good here because the income effect is our income goes down, we consume more rice. Both are possible, like graphically both are possible, in practise both are possible because some goods are inferior, some goods are normal, some goods are inferior, these things, these things can happen. Your wife after this, yes. Uh, I will do one more thing. Any questions, problems, concerns? So these are our two main examples, normal good, inferior good. There's a third thing that we might want to talk about, which is a special type of inferior good that we may want to think about because we can do it graphically. What's the special type of inferior good that we might want to think about drawing graphically? Which you may have talked about in micro one, probably did talk about in micro one. It begins with a G. Yep. Yeah, Giffin goods. What are our, what anyone, anyone, anyone else recall what our Giffin goods are? What what is a what is a giffin good? We'll do another graph over here for Giffin goods. Named after the economist who thinks of these, yep. Perfect, they're good to where when your, when your price of your rice goes up. The result of that is that you actually consume more rice. That's not the case in either of our graphs so far. Right, here the price went up and our total effect was still negative, um. But different goods are these things of the price goes up and we choose to consume more of that good. So if we break down our effects, right, when the price of rice goes up, our substitution effect says we consume less rice, our income effects depends, but if we have an inferior good. And the price of rice goes up, then we consume more rice. And so it is in principle possible that the income effect could dominate the substitution effect, right, it is, it is an in principle thing that our income, our little tiny income line here could have been bigger than the substitution line. It's in principle possible. Grass for these are a little weird looking, we can certainly draw them, rice. Pasta Budget constraint 1, budget constraint 2, and the price of pasture increases. I see one. It's probably like here, that that's still fine. Right, the price of rice went down, but we chose to consume more of it. Again, it's a kind of a weird outcome, um, because you have to have pretty extreme, you have to have very extreme income effects, the income effect has to be larger than the substitution effect. But we can graph this right, we talk about the substitution effect. We moved from Z To Z prime And then the income effect shifts us down to why. So substitution Pulls us backwards. But then the income effect dominates this. There's no special reason why these can't exist. It seems like a slightly unusual circumstance, the price goes up and you buy more of it. In principle they can happen. Before I say any more about the theory of well I I've finished the theory, we'll talk a bit about in practise these things, but any, any questions about the theory, yes. Sure, so Z to Z prime, I'll, I'll actually do it on a graph that's a bit more normal looking, because I think that's a bit easier. So the Z to Z prime, which is our substitution effect only. That's what we're looking for there is the change, the change in our consumption bundle which is exclusively due to the change in prices. So we wanna we wanna hold out our, our real income, which is our uh our utility, constant. So what we look what we're looking for is conditional on the fact that we're on our initial indifference curve, so we're still in, we're still happy with that. But we have that change in relative prices, so we have the change in the slope of the budget constraint. What would we choose to consume? And so Z to Z Prime is that hypothetical idea of what we would choose to consume if all that happened was the change in prices happened, but our utilities stayed the same. Is that better? Yeah, cool. That's the same for all of them, they're all, they're all that change. Excellent. Thank you for asking because important point and. You don't understand, you didn't understand. It's good. And then, and then Z to Y is the residual effect which is just from the income change, which is just that parallel drop in income. Any questions, otherwise, problems, concerns. OK, normal goods, these things here, common, happen all the time, most goods look like this. Sometimes when goods are inferior, well when goods are inferior, ah, which happens from time to time, they look like this. Right, here rice is being shown up as inferior good. Gift them goods, as happened here, price goes up and we choose to buy more of it, functionally never happens. Um, there are, it is extremely difficult to find examples of this. People spent 100 years after, after these were first hypothesised, it took about 100 years of people looking for of economists looking for these things to try to find examples of these things, um. And they are hard to find, they have been found, there are specific instances where you see this. You don't see it at a good level quite, you see it at an individual level, which is how we've discussed it, so that's OK, um, because what you need to for this to work, what you need is you need it to be inferior good, obviously. And you also need it to have a very large income effect, and a very large income effect happens when something is a very large share of your income. And so we need an unusual circumstance where we talk about something that is both an inferior good, so as you have more money, you buy less of it. But also makes up a very large portion of your income. And so if you're looking in developed countries where people are relatively wealthy, this just doesn't happen, because for those inferior goods, people have enough income that they've already pushed down their consumption of inferior goods to be quite a low, to be a relatively small amount, relatively small share of their income. So what you have to look for is you have to look in very poor, very poor, but not very, very poor, I know that sounds silly, but that that's where they find these things, um, and so the particular place where this is, I think first, though I don't wanna, Say that it's first question this is first found is in parts of China where we talk about um rice consumption in a part of, I believe, I can't tell you where, um, but in the early 2000s in part of China, the when we talk, and it is about rice, right, rice was the thing that they did for this. And so they manually instituted a change in the price of rice by giving rice vouchers, so they decreased the price of rice for certain fam for for for a range of families. Um, the poor families said, cool. Rice is inferior, rice is now cheap, rice is inferior, rice is cheaper, but um it's cheaper so I buy more of it. So they make it more expensive, I'm gonna tell the story as though they make it more expensive cos that's an easier story to tell. Um, the story that you end up with is rice becomes more expensive. If you're very, very poor. The only thing you're eating is rice, rice is more expensive, you eat less. Life sucks, right? If you're not so poor, if you're just a little bit poor, rice becomes more expensive, you buy a little bit less rice, you buy a little bit more vegetables, you reduce your consumption of some of the, of the small luxuries that you have, right, and you buy less rice because rice is more expensive. But if you're very poor. And you don't really have those luxuries, so all your money is going towards food, basically. And, but you're not so poor that you're only eating rice, you're eating a bit of a mixture of rice and like vegetables and meats. But then rice becomes more expensive, you can no longer afford to have those, those little food luxuries of vegetables and meats. And so what you end up doing is consuming more rice because that price has gone up. So it's a very specific little band of income where you see this happening, um, it does happen, but it's really uncommon because you need that specialised high share of income but also inferior goods, which just doesn't happen that often. But in principle it can happen, it just doesn't, we don't need to worry about it from a public policy standpoint, especially in a place like Australia, yes. As the price of rice just I The actual quantity of rice increases, um, the issue being that you still need, you need a you need a fixed, like, if you're very poor you still can afford the appropriate amount of like calorie caloric intake, um, when the price of rice increases, you have to get that by consuming more rice and less vegetable meat stuffs. So it's a weird situation where this happens, but in principle it can. But, but again, public policy standpoint, you would not worry about it in a place like Australia. It just doesn't come up. Even, even in most cases you wouldn't worry about it really. Yes, substitution effect, rice is more expensive, so we buy buy less rice, income effect, it depends, right, it depends on, Income effect, right, whether it's normal or inferior good. Any questions, problems? Cool. From this we can talk about demand curves, right, this is our, this is the way we generate demand curves, because we talk about, you know, this is talking about changes in prices and how that changes our, our, our consumption bundles. That's just our exception of rice, that's just our demand curve, right? uh. It's been a long time since I've done this. Price of rice. Quantity of rice. Is this the right way around? It doesn't matter for our for our purposes. Other way round, thank you. Sorry, brain fart, um. Now I don't know what I would work the first time, quantity. Price. Yes. Other way round. Tell me, tell me if it's the wrong call. Quantity price. Again, for our purposes doesn't matter. Um, We can talk about our demand curve here, because what we've said is, what happens to the price of the quantity of rice that we consume is the price changes, and we have low price, we have high quantity, right, that's. That's point Z. The low price and the high quantity. Q Ah When we increase our price of rice. Then we consume less. You are prime. Shocking, right, and we end up with, it's a downward sloping demand curve, my god, who would have thought, as the price increases, we buy less of it, downside in demand, but we get, we can, we can generate this from our too good model. Or from our end good model, whatever. Giffen goods, break this, right, cos gift and goods are when the price goes down, we buy more of it. So our inferior our our standard, if you like inferior goods still have downward sloping demand, our normal goods have downward sloping demand, it really relies on that giness of goods to have upward sloping demand, to have as price goes up we buy more stuff, and that's, Rare to the point of being something that never happens. Um, I feel like this is the wrong way around. Anyway, it doesn't actually matter for us, so for today at least. Um, Questions, questions, problems, concerns. OK, there is one other way that we can end up with upward sloping demand, which we won't talk about, which are our luxury, which are our our our um our Gelin goods, goods where you interpret the utility from the price of the good, um, but that's a different, that's a whole different kind of thing that can happen. We will push through and do this. Any questions though, questions, problems? Cool. What happens to consumption of rice as the price of pasta increases? So we have our rice, we have our pasta. And our price of pasta goes up. We can do this graphically, we can do this intuitively, we can do this sorry, using our our substitution and income effect idea. Substitution effect when the price of, when the price of pasta goes up. What happens to the price of, what happens to the quantity of rice? It goes Up, up. Two people said something, that'll do. It goes up as well, which again does not, shouldn't shouldn't, like that should be a substitution effect, right, when the price of pasta increases, then pasta is relatively more expensive, that means rice is relatively cheaper, which means we buy more rice. And as always for the income effect, the price of pasta increases, that means that our real income has gotten smaller, and so our quantity of rice will change depending on, Uh, whether we are an inferior good. Or a normal good, it might go up it might go down, it'll depend on inferiority versus normalness, graphically we can do all of this breakdown, we have our initial consumption bundle. Which we normally are calling Z for whatever reason. We see a we see this price change causes us to shift. Maybe here, uh, no, let's go a little bit over. Here If we want to break so the total so this is how point Y. Our total effect here is an increase in the quantity of rice that we consume, but we can break this down into an income and substitution effect, substitution effect we we want to be on IC one. Consuming power, but on the point. It is just. Sorry, on I see one, but with the new price ratio, at our initial utility level, but the new price ratio, that's gonna be Z. And so our substitution effect is the total effect is sorry our substitution effect is just the change from just the change in relative prices. Our income effect then is just the change. From Being poorer And so things happen exactly the way that we would expect. I'm gonna move this to be in a better spot. And, and so substitution effect pushes us to buy more rice. Good. Right, that's, as we expect, income effect pushes us to buy less rice, that means rice is being a normal good here, which again, most goods are normal, so that's not unreasonable. And the overall effect is that we consume more rice. Here, the overall effect is that we consume more rice, that's, that's fine, that doesn't really tell us anything. Maybe we would consume more rice, maybe we would overall consume less rice. It's not. There's no special reason we would do one or the other. Typically, I think we would consume more rice. Um, because it's cheaper, because typically substitution effect is larger, but there's no special reason for that. Any Questions, questions, problems. We could do the graph of um the graph of an inferior good, but we won't. I think Yeah, we won't. Questions, problems, We'll have a short break now, uh, because we are in a spot where we can have a short break. We'll start again at 5:56 because of a 5 minute break. I'll see you all shortly. Thanks, if you have any issues, you can come see me now, but I'd prefer if you ask to the room. Thanks. I Yeah, No, we're coming over Um Yeah. Um. Um, it's kind of arbitrary. But Not and We special reason. Oh. That's that's Yeah It'll depend on the price. Yeah is changing. Hold And it the Oh Because, because we want the. Because we want the new prices, original utilities for new prices. Thanks. Alright, 7 past, so we will, well, sorry, 57 past. So we will get back some. Thanks everyone. We'll get back started. One point of clarification that came up during the break from a question, and I want to just sort of emphasise that I, it's a fairly minor point, but I think it is worth emphasising because it's kind of unfortunate. Um, when we're talking about these substitution income effects, Graphically, it, guys, come on, graphically it does make a difference whether we do the substitution effect first or the income effect first. Uh, it's an entirely arbitrary choice that we that that is made, but the arbitrary choice that has been made and is the consistent way that that this is done is we do the substitution effect first. We first do the effect from the change in price, holding utility constant. We then do the change in income. It's an arbitrary choice, there's no good reason for this, it's just the way it is done. You could do it the other way, it wouldn't change anything radically, except that it would be incorrect by the by the standard of the of the discipline, right, it's an unfortunate thing, but you want to be able to discuss this material with other people in the discipline, that's the way it's done. Um, unfortunately. OK. So moving on, we have our, we, we've we sort of briefly mentioned our demand function, which I did do the wrong way around, it's price quantity. Um, But we can talk about our demand function in a bit more of a formal manner, right, because we have our demand function for our purposes, our demand function, which is the amount for good X, our demand function says how much of good X we consume. So DX here is our demand function for good X. The things it's gonna depend on are obviously the price of good X is gonna matter. We saw when price changes, we change how much we consume. The price of good wine is gonna matter, when the price of pasta changed, we consume, we change our consumption of of rice, our income's gonna matter, the income's gonna matter, ah because if we change income, we change our consumption of rice, and all of this is gonna be also conditional on our preferences, that's why we have that last little one here, last little thing here, it's saying that our demand depends also on, Whatever our preferences are, whatever our utility function is, is gonna feed into our, into our demand function. We don't typically, I've got this after a semicolonn to be like conditional on our preferences, because we don't normally talk about preferences changing, right, we absolutely talk about individuals having that facing different prices, facing different incomes. We don't normally do comparative statics of what happens if a person's innate preferences change. Um, there's a few reasons for this, one of them being that we don't think preferences change all that fast. Um, but perhaps more importantly, we don't think individual, we, we don't think there's much we can do to change preferences, right, people have their preferences. You can do marketing campaigns, maybe change preferences, but like, maybe, um, but we're gonna fix our preferences almost always. What we've been doing so far is what happens if one of these inputs change, right, what happens if the price of the good we're looking at changes or the price of our other good changes, our our substitute changes, or our income changes. But we can absolutely look at the price, what happens if the, what happens if multiple things change all at the same time, right, and we can see what happens there. Particularly we can think about what happens to our demand. For some good I'm not gonna worry about this one. What happens if, The price of the good doubles and the price of the alternative good doubles, and our income doubles. So we're looking at rice and pasta, rice and pasta are the only things we buy, our income doubles, the price of rice doubles, the price of pasta doubles. What happens to the change in the amount of rice we consume? Any takers There's an intuitive answer, right, there is an answer here that that you can that you can figure out, yep. Demand doesn't change, right, because everything's doubled, right? Yeah, the prices have doubled, but also your income has doubled, the relative prices haven't changed, your real income hasn't changed, everything that you could buy previously you can still buy. Everything that was unaffordable previously is still unaffordable, your preferences haven't changed, so really nothing here has changed. And so we really would expect there to be no change in the amount of stuff that you choose to buy. This hopefully is, hopefully again is reasonably reasonably intuitive in a sense of as another sense of if you measure your income and prices in dollars, and then you make your decision. You're gonna make the same decision as if you measure prices and income in sense, right, it doesn't matter because it's just a scaling up and down of the of the prices of everything, price of everything and also your income. Um, and so demand doesn't change here, um, and we've talked about why this is demand is homogenous, right, this is what this is, this is the, the technical term for what this is, right? If you double your income and double prices, then you shouldn't see any changes. Um, money is neutral. This is, this is a this is a kind of neutrality of money argument. The amount of money you have doesn't, it matters, but it matters in a real sense, not in a nominal sense. We're not gonna focus on this too much, this is just a. A point to mention. Any questions, questions, problems? We press on. Still in the previous section anyway. Taxation, let's talk about a policy question. We now have some tools, we have this this idea of substitution effect, income effect, we have how people change, change their decisions. We can do policy questions. So our policy question is gonna be, we're looking at taxation, we're wanting to generate funds, generate resources as a government. Do we want to go in and tax everything, right? Tax all good, put an equal tax on all goods, so essentially tax people's income. Or do we wanna tax, do we wanna do targeted taxing of individual goods? Right, this is a, this is a reasonable policy question. We're designing a tax policy, do we target, do we target our taxes on specific goods, or do we get a, do we do a broad based taxation? Do we tax lots of different, you know, everything equally, which is to say we tax the income. And we wanna know which one. What do you guys reckon? There's 2 goods here, right? There's 2 options here, right? Cos option A. Tax all goods Call this option B. Just tax one good. Option C is, it doesn't matter. Do you have absolutely no idea. Take a second to think about which one you reckon is the better thing to tax, either taxing, sort of everything. Or tax just one thing Again, conditional on raising the same tax. Tax everything, tax one thing. It doesn't make a difference. Well, you have absolutely no idea. Who reckons option A. Tenish, Option B. Sevenish Option C. That's surprising. My, my natural intuition is option C. Option C is wrong, so you're right to not put your hand up. Um, but option C was, was, um, was my would be my natural intuition, and option D. Two people being like, yes, I have no idea, which is fine, right, that's why, that's why we do the analysis. Um, fortunately, very luckily, the plurality decision was the right one, right, it is going to end up being better to tax all goods equally. We want to be careful with how we do tax tax all goods or tax income. We want to be a little bit careful with how we do our analysis. We want to make sure that we're doing a fair comparison, right, we don't want to do a comparison between taxing our good 5% and taxing all goods 5% because clearly the welfare implications of taxing all goods by 5% is gonna be, you know, massively more negative than taxing just one good 5%. So we make sure we have a fair comparison, our fair there's gonna be two kind of options of making a fair comparison, either having the same change in welfare, or if we have the same welfare detriment to society, which one can we get a be a tax take from, or you can do it as the same total amount of tax taken and talk about which one has a smaller welfare effect on society. Um, both of these will give you the same answer, it's gonna be a lot easier graphically to do option B. So we're gonna try and talk about the same size of tax, and which of the, which one of these two options, either tax income or tax that specific good, it's gonna have a larger welfare effect. And we need our graphs. So we're gonna have this good that we're thinking about taxing. And I'm gonna say all other goods here, so this is just the rest, the rest of the rest of the goods that we can do. It's not actually that important, let's not do that here, we don't have to, so we won't. Good why, good why all the goods doesn't doesn't really matter here. And so our budget constraint is that our income is the price of good X times X plus the price of good Yx Y. We have our initial budget constraint. We have the initial consumption bundle that we choose to consume. Which is here. Point Z, I'm not sure why we're doing point Z at the start, but that's what we've been doing, so we'll keep doing that. And we're looking at two taxation options. One is a lump sum tax, a lump sum tax is just gonna shift our, it's, it's gonna be a tax on income, it's gonna shift our our our our budget constraints, sorry, inwards towards the origin, right, parallel shift, so we can tax the income. So, we have our two options, we have our, Income tax, Where the tax that we take is our new budget gonna be income minus taxation. Is our price of good X times. X plus the price of good Y times Y. So we're gonna shift our shift our budget straight down by the size of the tax. The other option would be taxing good X. good, good X only. And so then now we're gonna be more looking like income is for every unit of good X that we buy, we have to pay a tax. These are the two options. We're gonna start by looking at taxing good X. putting a tax on good X functionally is increasing the price of good X. For the on the consumer side, what they're talking about is an increase in the price of good X. Previously you paid P X, now you pay P X plus T. Right, if we talk about if we only buy good X, previously we could buy income divided by price of good X. Now with the tax, we can only buy income divided by the price of good X. Plus the tax because on every unit of Good X we buy, we have to pay the tax rate. If we buy only good wine, nothing changes. So this is our budget constraint with the, oh, let's do that. With the per unit tax. And a person chooses to consume some some amount. Uh, we're gonna have a lot less of a good ex, don't we? Um, choose to consume some amount over here somewhere. Their indifference curve after the tax, they consume a point. Why? And we've taken home some tax, some amount of tax. The amount of tax is a little bit hard to see, it's probably less than we were kind of hoping for as the government, because previously they were consuming, Um, So Q0 of good X, and so we were sort of we, we were, as the government going in and saying OK we're gonna put a tax of size T per unit, they're buying Q0, we're gonna take home tax of T times Q0 yay, and that doesn't work out for us because the fact that we increased the price of the good means that people bought less of it, they only bought Q1. And so our total tax take here is gonna be the tax rate per unit times the number of times the new number of units, Q1. The government got a little bit less than it was hoping for because people substituted away from good X because it was taxed because the price is relatively high. That's fine, but, but that's fine. And they chose to consume a point win. Any questions, questions, concerns, problems here. Now we're gonna do something, we're gonna be really sneaky about what we do next. So the really sneaky thing we do next is we wanna say, What is the equivalent total tax take, if we instead of doing this taxing good X, which moves us from Z to Y. Because of the budget constraint change, we instead want to do a lump sum taxation, we instead wanna do our our income tax, and just take a fixed amount of money straight off the top from this person. Not change the relative prices, so our new budget constraint for our persons is gonna be the same, be the same slope as BC one cos relative prices hasn't changed, but we're gonna be shifting inwards in some amount that means that we are taking the same amount of tax as we were getting from the per unit tax. And what's a little bit sneaky here, what we, the way we can do this is a bit sneaky is we know how far that moves in, and I'll first draw it and then I'll say why. It's our budget constraint with the lump sum tax. I'm gonna say first draw it and then say why, and I've drawn it so it goes through point Y, goes through option Y. But is parallel to the to the initial budget constraint, has the same price ratio as the initial budget constraint. And the reason why we can do this is, first off, as as we know, has to be has to be parallel to the initial budget constraint, the price ratio hasn't changed, but also because we're taking the same amount of money from this person. That option Y, that option that they're choosing, that they would be, that they would be choosing under the per unit tax, that has to still be available, it has to still be possible under our lump sum tax, because we're taking the same amount of money from them. And so whether we take the money and they, we, we, we go to them and ultimately, however we implement the tax, we're taking some money from them, so, so that Y is affordable, if we're taking that by taking money every time they buy good X, or we're taking money from them every time, just straight off the top, initially, either way, point Y is still available because we're still taking the same total amount of tax from them. Hopefully that's not totally unreasonable, you can do it, you can do it algebraically and do a whole bunch of work. But I don't want to, I wanna just make the argument. We can either take the money per unit and they buy Y or we can take the money in total, and if they're taking the same money, they can still buy the same goods because we're still extracting $1000 from you in tax, and when we extract the per in tax, we extracted $1000 from you in tax and you bought Y. And so in the income tax, we extract $1000 from you. You can still buy Y, it still should be available because we've extracted the same money from you. Questions, questions, clarifications, issues there. Yes. It's not tangent to anything currently. Uh, we, it, it'll be tangent to a to an indifference scope, um, but it's not currently tangent to anything, it will be in a second. OK. And that is in a sense, the point is that our new our our our budget constraint for the per unit tax, that's tangent at Y, right, that's tangent to the difference at Y. But we have, but if we talk about our lump sum tax, we have a different price ratio. Different price ratio means that we're definitely going to be not tangent to the indifference curve of Y. In particular, there's gonna be some other indifference curve up in here somewhere. Just looking graphically, there's gonna be some other indifference curve up in here. But we will be tangent to that lump sum budget constraint, lump sum tax budget constraint. And you'll notice, again, just graphically. That lump sum indifference curve, the lump sum taxation difference curve, is a higher indifference curve than the per unit indifference curve. The amount of money we take is the same. But in the per unit taxation in the in the in the directed taxation on X, we end up consuming at at point capital Y here, at bundled capital Y. Whereas in the lump sum tax, we could consume it why. But we could instead consume that, I'm gonna call this capital X now. We could instead consume a capital X and that's better, and that's better for us. And this is our, all of this is our big argument for our lump sum taxation principle. You don't really want to target individual things when you're talking about taxation, you want to do lump sum taxation. It's less distortionary, right, because when you tax an individual item. You're doing two things, you're making the person poorer, and you're also messing with the relative prices of the goods. Whereas if you just take the money from them as a lump sum of as a lump sum, you're not messing with the price, the relative prices of goods, all you're doing is making them poorer, and that's less distortionary. There's a there's a fewer, there's fewer distortions happening, and so you end up with higher utility for every person if you're taking income as lumps for each person you're taking income as a lump sum, rather than making sort of targeted income, right, all of this is, How taxes are structured can affect welfare even for the same total size of the tax, right, whether we took, again BC lowercase T is our per unit tax, BC capital is a lump sum tax, it's the same total amount of tax we get, we still got $1000 from every taxpayer. But our taxpayers were better off because we structured out if we structure our tax as a lump sum taxation. Lump sum or equal cost all good taxes are less welfare damaging than taxes on single goods, so in and because tax on single goods have an income and also a substitutionary distortion effect, substitution distortionary effect. And so our big policy question of do we want to tax broadly or narrowly is generally speaking, we want to tax broadly, you want to tax as broad as possible, you want to do lump optimally in some sense, you wanna do something that looks to a consumer like a like a like a lump sum taxation. In the absence of, I'm gonna underline this, in the absence of additional considerations, it is gonna be important, we can mention those briefly. But there's no other things we have to think about. Then lump sum taxes are much, much better than per unit taxes. This is our lump sum taxation principle. Broad-based taxes are more efficient and are less welfare damaging than narrow taxes. Questions, problems. Catching this in this way because I know a lot of your PPE students like policy outcomes, yeah. Questions, problems. OK. I've underlined in the absence of additional considerations, what are some additional considerations we might want to worry about when we're thinking about how we design our tax system. There's a couple You guys have seen some of these in micro one, some of them probably in your in your politics courses. Hit me with some stuff. What, what are some other things we might worry about when we're talking about taxation? OK. Yeah. More or less Same taxes on purchases. But you have Want Sure, so I, I'm, I'm gonna, I'm, I'm gonna take from that and I'm gonna say, so, so yes, you're right, when we take taxes should be broad based as possible, um we, we do mean, As, as. Percentage tax, right, so we, so the GST is a good example of a broad-based tax because it's about, it's 10% on most goods. So when we say, when we say broad-based and equal, I don't mean equal in numerical number, I really do mean equal in, in proportion, which we didn't quite do here but you can tweak it to be that way, um, so yeah, equal in equal as the as a proportion, 10% on everything, not, not literally a dollar on everything, yes, yeah. Right, so when we talk about our income tax, we don't have lump sum income taxes, we don't have, you know, you, you could structure income taxes of every person pays $25,000 of income tax every year. You could do this, it's a tax policy that one could implement. We don't have that, right? We don't nearly have that. You could implement every person pays 7% of their income every year. We don't have that, we have a progressive tax system, um, and we, so we have a, so, We ultimately have progressive income tax. Lump sum would be in a certain sense more efficient, but we choose to have progressive income taxes because we're concerned about um inequality issues, right, we're concerned about equity, equity and equality issues, and so therefore we have progressive income taxes. There's also arguments that a dollar for, there's also arguments for progressive income taxes, that a dollar for, B is different than a dollar for you, is different than a dollar for Gina Rinehart, right, um, and so taking a dollar from the very, very wealthy is a different thing than taking in terms of welfare impact than taking a dollar from you, and that's not been incorporated in our models, in in this lump sum principle, simple lump sum principle model. Um, so yes, progressive income taxes, so, uh, one additional consideration might be. The desire for to minimise inequality in society, or to recognise that inequality exists in society and that should be included. What's another reason we might want to tax some things but not other things, yep. Yep. Cool, yeah. So Peruvian taxes, so I'm just gonna say externalities. Externalities, and as you say, you do Peruvian taxation to deal with this, right? um so you if there's a, if, if something causes harm to the rest of society, then, then taxing it will be good, right, anyway, right, that might be welfare improving to tax it. If something causes benefit to society, you might not want to tax that as heavily. In the GST case, right, we tax most things 10%, but we don't tax fresh fruit and fresh vegetables and that kind of stuff for 10%. Um, because partly as an inequality issue, right, we, you know, if you're, we want to keep the prices of low cost things low, um, because there are people who can only afford low cost things, but also partly from an externalities perspective, right, these things are healthy foods, it will create healthier people and therefore who, who will then be a lower burden on the, Well, on the, uh, on the healthcare system, on the public healthcare system, um, so there might be reasons why we do this, these are the two main ones, but only others that we can think of that we might want to worry about for targeting specific taxation. Targeted taxation. Or targeted lack of taxation. These are the two ms I want to talk about. Cool, yeah, equity, oh sorry, no, equity concerns, externality concerns, other kinds of market failure concerns as well, right, if you had market failures due to informational issues or due to anything else, right, other kinds of market failures might also be there might, might also be scope for taxation. OK. This is the end of this section. Any questions, not end of today, like end of this section. Any questions, problems? Things to bring up. OK. We do also want to talk about compensating an equivalent variation, both because they're interesting and and to emphasise that they that they are different. So, the Gillard labour government, this is going back away now, this is back in 10, 2010, 10, 2010, um 2011. This kind of time frame. The Gillard government, Gillard labour government introduced a carbon pricing mechanism, um, we should say that they put a tax on energy usage, on generally on energy usage, but on coal generate coal generated power, um, but they wanted to make sure that they recognised, well we can't just tax energy because energy would be because they have those, Those equity concerns, because energy is a higher part of the spending bill for poor people than for rich people, right, if you earn $100,000 a year, you spend $1000 a year heating your home. If you earn $50,000 a year, you spend $1000 a year heating your home. If you get a million dollars a year, you spend $1000 a year hitting your home. Um, so it's a much bigger portion of your income if you're not wealthy. So they wanted to make sure they didn't want to just tax, just do the one tax on energy usage because it's because it's damaging to to low income earners. Um, so instead they want to increase the industry's tax, but also do a transfer, do a lump sum transfer to people so they were no worse off. And so we want to think about, first of all, you know, we want to apply words to this, so we have some technical terms to work with these things. And also think about how we, how much money they have to give you, how much money they would have to give you. And so we go to our graphs, so we like our graphs, um, I'm gonna use energy as the um, As the good that they're taxing, it wasn't exactly that, but it was close enough for for our purposes. And on our Y axis, this is where I am going to introduce this idea of all other goods. So our two goods are energy and everything else. It's what we're choosing between. Um, the reason why it's often handy to have all other goods is one of our axes, part of the reason is that all other goods are, we can, we can measure our spending on all other goods in dollars. Right, the quantity of all other goods is just amount of money, whereas energy is, is kilojoules or whatever. Um, so we, it's nice to be able to have something that's just the dollar amount. So the X axis the Y axis is gonna be all of the goods are spending on all of the goods measured in dollars. And our consumption of energy measured in kilojoules. So We had our initial state of the world, as always, initial budget constraint, initial consumption bundle. Everything's fine, we consume some energy, we consume some of the goods. We're OK. And then the government says, well we want to reduce energy consumption, but we don't want people to be harmed, from a utility perspective harmed. So we're gonna increase the price of electricity, but, We're gonna compensate you for it. So we increased the price of electricity by introducing a tax. We can't just do that cos if you just do that, we get this horrible outcome where we end up on a lower indifference curve. And our people are much worse off. So we don't want to do just that, what we wanna do is we want to then compensate them for the compensate them for that loss. And so we give them money, we do a price change. BC 1 to BC2. Is the tax. And then we're gonna go BC2 to BC3. Is our transfer. We're gonna give money back to people. And we want to give money back to people. So that They're no worse off. So they get back to their initial level of utility. And so we want to make sure that we're doing the new price ratio. We're giving money to people so they can, they can still be on their initial utility level. So they started off at Z. If we only taxed them, they would end up down here at at some Y somewhere. And so instead we tax them, but also give them a big pile of cash. And we end up at X. And if we do this right in just this amount, we get the policy goal that we're after, we get that our people move from Z to X, they're no worse off because we gave them enough money to compensate them for the change. So they could have, actually they can't here have afford Zed, but they, they, they, they're no worse off, they can't afford Z anymore, but they're no worse off, um, but. Q E Q1 E Q2E but we see that radical reduction or big reduction in the amount of electricity being used. Because people are finding other other methods, right, they're installing solar panels on their roof to reduce their electricity from the grid, they're buying green power from the grid, they're just reducing, they're buying more energy efficient appliances because electricity is more expensive, so there's reasons to pull that back, but our person is no worse, no worse off. Any Questions, questions, problems, there's one more thing, actually I'll just finish the sentence first. um, this is the, we have compensated our consumer for the variation in the price that we've imposed, so we impose a variation in price, and we've compensated them for that variation, and because of that, this thing is called, this, this amount of tax, this amount of transfer, sorry, this dollar sign amount of transfer is called the, Compensating Variation. Because we have compensated them for the variation in the price that we've done. Not exactly why, but that'll that'll do for our purposes. So we compensate them. We make a change in price, we compensate them for that change in price. To pull them back up to their initial utility level. And this is What they did, right, they sat down and said, well what, what levels do we have to do to make this work and, and it turns out, This is the level, this is the level you have to do to make this work. Ultimately it was like a was 20% odd increase in prices and a and a $500 rebate or something along those lines, I can't remember the exact numbers. So if you Doing this in your policy, this is the thing that you're talking about, you're talking about compensating variation. Questions, questions, problems, concerns. This is the yes. Here people are changing their consumption based on income, so the initial change, the the Z to Y change, the hypothetical Z to Y change, that would be only because we change the prices, but only because we increased the price, um, that has your substitution income effect, right, um, we're kind of undoing the income effect, if you like, by giving people money. We're giving people enough money to undo their income effect so that they, End up consuming at point X, they change their consumption bundle, um, it's just they changed the consumption bundle because there's a relative price change, but they're still just as well off. I don't know if I answered your question, can you, Sure, yeah, so if, so, so if you were fabulously wealthy and the price that you're paying for energy is very, very, very small, as as a proportion of your total spending, the amount you spending energy is very, very small. You're kind of a corner case, this variation is gonna be different for different people. If you're in that kind of corner case, you probably don't change your change, you know, if the price of electricity doubles, you don't care because, like, I don't change my rice consumption because the price of rice doubles, right, because it's, it's small anyway, but whatever. Um, so in that case you probably would have compensating variation for them might have been smaller, maybe, but it's, it's hard to say. I don't, I don't have a good answer for you of how competing variation varies at different levels of income, um. It's not something I've thought about before. It could in principle be different for different levels of income. It's all I'm gonna say. This was compensation, it's a real thing, people have to calculate these things for for real situations, um, conservation because we compensate for a price change. Another way that we might think about the welfare effect, the size of the welfare effect of a price change, right, because this is kind of a, this is kind of a a monetary way of thinking about the size of the welfare effect. We're gonna make a price change, how much money would we have to give you to compensate you for that? It's a way of thinking about the welfare impact, measured in dollar terms, the dollar welfare impact. Another way of thinking about the dollar welfare impact, is what we call the equivalent variation. It's a different thing, but it's still, you know, it's still a thing. So the equivalent variation. Is what we're thinking about is what is the income loss that has the same welfare effect as the price increase. Um, so again we have our arbitrary good X, we have all other goods so that we have something we can measure in dollars. We have our initial budget constraints. We think about a price change. Think about a price change, sort of hypothetical, so we start at Z, if we hypothetically did a price change, we would end up at. Why? And we're worse off, absolutely, no question, right, because we're on a lower indifference curve, we have less money, we have less real real income, different price, yeah, we're a lower in different curve, so we're worse off. But we could say, suppose that we wanted to know the, as I said it's here, the income loss that has the same welfare impact as the price change. So we want to not change prices, not change relative prices. But we want to still take take money away from people, so they move from IC1 down to IC 2, so they choose to move to IC from IC1 to IC, well, that they require to move from IC1 to IC2. So we want that same price ratio, we wanna fix that price ratio we had before. The slope of BC one. We want to bring that down, we want to pull that curve down. By taking away people's income, pull that curve down until we're tangent to that new indifference curve, that new lower indifference curve. So we pull that curve down until we're tangent to that new lower indifference curve, which I've not drawn well enough. I can't do it. And so if we were to take away this much money. If we were to tax people by the, if we were to tax people or reduce the change the prices so that we move from BC1 to BC2, we move from IC 1 down to IC2. If we were to instead just take away this lump sum of money that I've got on the that I've got marked here on the left and just pull that whole budget constraint down parallel in a parallel manner, we would move from Z to, let's call it X. And that's the same welfare impact, it's purely an income change, it has the same welfare impact as the price change had. So it has an equivalent effect, right, we're not compensating for something we're having an equivalent effect, we're having the income change that would be equivalent to the change in the price. And for that reason, This thing here is called. The equivalent variation. Because it's the variation in your income that would be equivalent to the variation in price, to changing the price. This is less used in practise, it's rare because you want to be here, you want to be getting up and saying if we did this price change, that would be equivalent to just taking away this much money from someone in terms of the welfare impact. So you can measure the effect of the, if you're not going to compensate them, you can say, well, we have policy one which changes this price policy, 2 changes this price by some amount policy, 3 increases this price by some amount, they'll give us the same taxation amount. Which one's gonna have a bigger, bigger effect on people? You can compare them using an equivalent variation, you would look at, well, the equivalent variation in policy one, that's the same as taking away $1000. Policy two is the same as taking away $1500. Policy three is the same as taking away 1 $1200. So we should therefore do policy one. So we can think about, we can rank policies, we can put a a monetary cost. In terms of welfare on different price change policies that we might be thinking about. Similarly benefit, right, you can talk about price increase, ah sorry, price decreases, and the equivalent variation let be positive. This is similar to compensating variation. Right? But it's not the same, do I have a, do I have a thing here? No. Um, this is similar to integration, but it's not the same, right? Commerce integration was the price we're gonna do the price change, how much money do we have to give you to keep you at the same utility. So prices change, utility stays the same. Compensate aviation is the opposite, right? If we were to do a price change, how much effect would that have? So, sorry, sorry, if we were to do a price change, what is the income that's equivalent to that, and so it's. Utility changes, but prices stay the same. To be equivalent variation, compensating compensating variation. They are in principle different numbers. If you calculate these things out, they're not gonna they're in general not gonna be radically different values, um, but they can be different values, they are typically different values. If there is any, if there is no income effect, these will give you the same value, but if there is an income effect then they do give you different values for the monetary effect, for the for the welfare cost of a price change. Any questions on Finding these things, looking at these things graphically. All good? Very quiet. So kind of does not help with the feeling of it being very quiet, anyway, um. So these are, 11 way that we can look at these is we can think about these as different ways to think about the impact of a price change, right? In fact, one way to think about impact change, compensating variation, how much would we have to pay you to compensate you. One way is equivalent variation, how much are you harmed by this price change? These are different, as I say, these are different ways of thinking about impact of a price change on welfare. When we talked about the welfare impact of a price change in micro one, the welfare impact on an individual of a price change in micro one, what was our measure of the of the welfare impact of a price change in micro one? How do we think about that? Welfare impacts. It's not trick question. Money, not, not so much, not so much money, we talked about something else, yeah. We talked about consumer circles, yeah, everyone's like, well, of course, um, you talk about consumer surplus, that was our way of thinking about price, uh, about the welfare impact of a price change. The price of a good goes up. We didn't quite do it this way, but you can, right, um. Let's make sure we do this the right way round this time. Shall we? Um, At this nice low price, we had this nice bit of consumer surplus in that upper triangle, if if the price goes up to a high price, then we end up with a smaller triangle of consumer surplus. Um, and so the change in consumer surpluses is what's a bit different. If we, if we increase our price from low price to the high price, the change in consumer surplus is the amount that we, that we have traded in here. Right, that our consumer we said was that much worse off. It's not unreasonable, it's fine, it's a fine way of saying it, um. And this was what we talked about as the welfare impact on the consumer of a price change in micro one. Now we have these two other ways, um, I wanna say that these two other ways that consumer uh ration and equivalent in creation are in a very real sense, the better ways of thinking about the welfare impact, because it really is, we change the price of the good. In dollar terms, how much are you harmed, the equivalent variation. Right, we changed the price of a good, how much money do we have to give you to get you back to where you were before, it's compensating direction. These are really direct measures of how much worse off are you when we change the price. Um, and consumer surplus is kind of a bit more of a nebulous thing, which isn't quite clear what's going on, um, but, It's gonna be fine for our purposes if you are looking at policy implications. Consumer surplus is a completely fine thing to use partly because it's a lot easier to measure, it's a lot easier, a lot easier to measure than the equivalent of compensating variation, and we're gonna have that, um, consumer surplus is always gonna be between consum um compensating variation and equivalent variation. Um, which one of these two things is bigger or smaller depends on the income, the direction of the income effect, um, but, uh, consumer surplus is between these, so if you're not really worried about which of these two, if you're in a policy problem and you're not worried about which of these two things you should be using, consume and you can get access to consumer surplus, then consumer surplus is fine. These things are usually, unless, unless we're talking about a really like a luxury good or a really inferior good, right, very strong income effects, these things are all gonna be pretty similar anyway, right, your measurement error is going to exceed your theoretical error, theoretical difference anyway for most goods unless they have big strong income effects. So these things are all fine to use and not fine to be completely indifferent between, but like for most policy goals, it's fine to conflate them at least a little bit. OK 10 minutes. Questions. There's one last section to do for today, any questions, questions, problems, concerns? We're all good. Compensating an equivalent variation. Yes. When They'll, we'll always If you had really specific, if you, if you, so the question was if we're asked about EV or CV you'll, the answer will end up being $300 typically no, um. Only because to to get the specific monetary value out of this thing, you need to know, you need to know a lot of, you need to do a lot of algebra. It's not hard algebra, but you need to throw a whole lot of algebra at the problem, right, so to work out CV for example. Um, I would need to be able to find the point, I would need to be able to construct the indifference curve, algebraically. I would need to be able to find the point on the indifference curve that is tangent to the new price ratio. Which is, again, it's just algebra, but it's a bit tedious and a bit tricky, it can be a bit tricky. So we would not typically ask people to do that because the time burden in an exam, for example, the time burden's higher than the value of it. We're much more likely to ask about these things conceptually and to require graphs about to demonstrate them. It is in principle possible, but you wouldn't be, You wouldn't be asked to do, no, you would not be asked to do that problem. Um, the, the only way that I can think of a problem where you would end up with a specific value is if you had a really genericcur if you had something that was, that had a whole bunch of curves on it, so if we had all of these things and then this. And then also this. And I, and we gave you. 100 210, 305, 415, 422, whatever, and we asked you to work out, And we and we then said, what is the equivalent variation, what is the compensating variation, um, because then you have to demonstrate knowledge, right, uh, but no, I would, I, I, I would not be asking, You define the equation of the line that is tangent to the curve because it's not that interesting from a micro perspective. It's a good question though. Otherwise, any questions, problems? OK Lovely. Our last section for today is elasticity, yay. You all remember elasticity from micro one, we hope, uh, which is our percentage change in um quantity demanded as we make a percentage change in price. And that's fine. Um, it's a little bit tedious, it's a little bit annoying to work with, um, because we have these percentage changes. And so when we think about percentage change in these things, we talk about this as the um the change in price over the amount of the price times 100. Sorry. Change in quantity over the amount of quantity times 100, change in price over the amount of price. Times 100. The hundreds cancel We rearrange a little bit and we get. Change in quantity over change in price times price over quantity. And in micro one, we have to muck around a lot with talking about whether you did sort of initial value for changes or final value for changes or like a midpoint formula value for changes, and we're not gonna have to worry about that for us because, We can do derivatives. Um, and we don't have to and that just means we don't have to worry about those things. Because we talk about change at a point, not change over an interval. Um, and isn't that nice? It's also nice occasionally, I don't think we're gonna use this very often, but it is nice to have it depending on the specific functional form of some things. Um, this is also the derivative of the log of quantity as we change the log of prices. It doesn't come up often, but it's something that we can in principle do if we if we really want to. But in general, this is gonna be what we're using pretty much always for elasticity. Um, I should do the little spiel about elasticity. elasticity is a fantastic way of measuring problems. Um, it comes to your, your, your concern earlier about taxation should be, should be, what does equal taxation mean, and equal taxation means 10% because a dollar tax is a weird thing to have. It's the same for the same reason that we care about. Elasticity rather than slopes of demand curves, right, because elasticity says it is is a percentage change, it really is the effect of a change, right, if I come and I tell you that I, that you've sold, that you know, you increased the price of a good by $2 and that meant that that meant that you sold 100 less units. That information means nothing, right, there's there's no way to interpret that that is useful, that. $2 more than 100+ units, is, is $2 a lot, right? Are these cars, and we've increased the price by $2 and, and there's that's no change, and $100 + units there's heaps of less cars that we've sold, or is this like potatoes, and $2 is a huge increase in price and $100 is is virtually no change in, in quantity, right? And and so that's why we care about elasticity, because it takes those things into account, because it says percentage changes, right, we increase the price of the good by 10%. And then, and therefore we sold 15% fewer goods, right, is, is a meaningful sentence regardless of whether we're talking about cars or potatoes. We don't need to know what good we're talking about. That's why we care about elasticity. Um, Oh no, that's one of ours. That's why I care about elasticities. Uh, when we look at elasticities, own price elasticities for for some very well own price and cross price elasticities for some various sorts of goods, we see that these things tend to be around about -1. So this is price elasticities for organic and non-organic foodstuffs in Dutch supermarkets in 2006, uh, because there's some data that I was able to find. And what we see are, let's focus first of all on these ones because these are the these are these are interesting in a simple way. This is our demand for non-organic food, so our demand for normal foodstuffs, eggs, milk, beef, whatever. And -1 here, that means that for every percent increase in the price of the good, we tend to see about a 1% fall in the amount of goods that are sold. Right, so it's a 1% for 1% deal. But basically all of these goods. They have elasticity of around about 1. Which is not uncommon. We can talk about organics, organic food. So these are specialised, these are specialist items, right, they they're marketed as organic, that's all fine. And what we see here is that these things are more price sensitive, which is in some cases I think actually quite surprising, I would call that surprising, um, because what we're seeing here is that a 1% increase in the price is causing, I mean in the case of beef, a 2% reduction. In the amount of goods that people are buying, people are actually surprisingly price sensitive on organic foods, which would be all against what my intuition would be, I guess, where people buying these organic marked foods would care less about prices, because they care more about prices. You can think you can think of this on the other side as well, right, a 1% reduction in prices means we would sell 2% more stuff, is another way of thinking of this. Questions, problems, Cool. ah yeah, there are a few big big outliers and then eggs apparently no one cares, organic eggs and non-organic eggs look the same, which is interesting, yep. Yes. Um, For organics, and not for for sorry, and then we talk, then we can also talk about cross price elasticities. So these are gonna tend to be smaller, actually focus on, These ones first. We can talk about cross price elasticities, so these are our LCDs for, I'm actually a bit long time. We'll push some of this to next week. um cross price elasticities, so the price of organics here doesn't seem to really have much of an effect on our demand for non-organic food, right? People aren't going in and saying, oh no, the organic food is really expensive, so therefore I buy more non-organic food. It just, it happens a little bit here, these numbers are all positive. But it's a small change, it's a small impact, um, when the price of organics change, it doesn't seem to have much of an effect on the quantity of non-organic food that's purchased. These are all about 0. Whereas it seems like the price of non-organics really does impact your organic food. Right, so these are people who go to the supermarket and say, I kind of would like organic food, but I see that the non-organic one is $1 is 10% cheaper than I thought, so I'm gonna buy that instead. So we do see some of that happening, these are basically all positive, in some cases quite positive, um, so this is saying a 1% increase, a 1%, Increase in the price of non-organic beef, 1%, let's, 1% fall in the price of non-organic beef is causing a 1% fall in the quantity consumed of organic beef, but not vice versa, which is also kind of interesting. Um, so we get these kinds of things, right? Most things are around about one-ish is not uncommon for foodstuffs, luxury foodstuffs might be a bit higher than one, magnitude bigger than one. There can be some cross price effects, but not always. Questions, problems, these are the kind of numbers we're talking about. Sure Um, we will unfortunately have to put some of it to the end, but we will do these ones at least. Um, so we have our demand function on price of good X, price of good Y and income. It looks the way we would kind of expect. When income goes up, we buy more of the good. When the price of good X goes up, we buy less good X, when the price of good Y goes up, we buy more good X. Very, very standard lookingish, depending on how you view the things, very standard looking um demand function. And we can talk about the elasticity of demand. Um, at a particular point. And so our elasticity. Our own price elasticity of demand at, PX equals 2, PY equals 3, and income is 100, well, definition, well, not definition, but you know, by working out we said that this is the, the change in quantity as we change prices times, The initial price over the initial quantity. in not definitionally what it is, but it's, it's what what you work out this to be. The derivative here is really is very easy. What's the, what is here the derivative of quantity as we change prices? For you change prices. Lots of people can see it very quickly. Come on, someone, someone yell out the answer for me. For a long time people. Yeah, uh yeah, uh, we have to have 0.5. I actually wanna say -2 here. Right, it's -2. Because It's -2, it's, it's that -2. Then we have the price of the quantity, that's actually the hard part for this particular problem, because the price is easy, the price is 2. P X PYI price is 2, but the quantity we have to actually put down some numbers for income minus 2 times the price, plus 0.5 times the price of good wine. And this works out to, after, you know, sitting and doing this a little bit, this works out to be about -0.04ish. Um, so this is saying that if at this particular consumption, at a particular price and income level, Well, it doesn't seem as though price changes really make that much of a difference, right, the price changes. If the price were to change by 1%, then quantity consumed changes, almost not at all. Right, because at this, at this price level.
