SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
All right. Welcome back, I would say everyone, that's probably a bit of a stretch. Welcome back, everyone. For our second lecture for week 4, which is our very last lecture on strictly consumer theory. Uh, next week we'll be talking about game theory stuff. I know the um the class outline on, on programmes and courses talks about institutions. Uh, we won't be doing that, we'll be doing game theory. Instead, you can think of game institutions as game theory, you probably shouldn't, but you maybe could. Uh, but we're doing game theory, so I think it's an important, useful tool to have, um, so that's what we're doing next week. This week we're gonna be finishing off our talk about choice over time. Uh, before we do that though, admin, yay, admin. Um, the admin for today is that the major project sheet has been posted onto Wattle. It's actually posted on Wednesday morning, so you can have a look at this. So this course has a major project, a typically, though not necessarily written project, sort of 15, 15% of your assessment, 500 words. 15% of your assessment, sorry, not 500 words, much more than that. Um, usually typically 1500 word report that you write, right, because it's long form long form written assessment. The basis of this is that you find a piece of popular media talking about economics. This can either be a YouTube video or something very similar to that, or a podcast or something very similar to that, or a couple of newspapers, usually newspapers is like you would take 2 or 3 newspaper articles talking about the same sort of thing but from different perspectives. And then you would go in and critique that from the perspective of an intermediate microeconomics piece of work. So you would go in and say, OK, so they said this, but they didn't do any actual modelling, here's the modelling, and based on that modelling, what they said is complete garbage, right, actually it's just completely wrong. Or we did the modelling and yeah, the modelling all works out. They said, they said they made claims A, B, and C, and A and B, we did some modelling, that works, part C, we did some modelling, it didn't really work. And but so you know, overall it's a bit of a mixed bag, right, you can, you, you work through these. And that's the, that's the broad idea, we'll talk more about all the other top points here in a second, but are we OK with the broad idea of the assessment? Questions, concerns, great. Cool. Um, some of the things that makes this assessment a little bit different than what you might normally see is that while you can write a report and we're very happy for you to write a standard 1500 word essay, essay report thing, um, if you do a rep in any case you should have like graphs should be included regardless of which one of these you're doing, um. We're also very happy for you to do something else if you want to. We're very happy for you to produce, as it says here, a video or our podcast version of this, right, so you can produce a video version of your work, you can produce a podcast version of your work, and that's fine, we're very happy for you to do that. If you're doing video or podcast, it shouldn't be just reading a script, right, there should be some amount of, of, of production value, but obviously we're not expecting like a super duper fancy. Video or podcast, this is really if you would like to do these things, then that's fantastic, um, as a quick note, if you do do these things, oh yes. Yes, if you do do these things, you need to include a transcript. Um, so the one of the things that you upload to Waddle is a transcript of the work. Um, you can, there's, there's different ways of producing that. If you do have a script that you work from, you can upload the script. If you don't have a script, like a specific script script that you work from, but you work from like dot points that you that you rip off, then there's software that you can get that will produce a transcript of. Of things. Any questions on the that specific again component, cos there's lots of other stuff to talk about, but yes, if

SPEAKER 2
you're doing a podcast.

SPEAKER 1
Sure, so yeah, so I've done this last year, some of the people who did podcasts were able to, we were just barely able to manage without graphs, it's hard, but it can be done, like you can discuss things in a way that you don't actually have the graph and you can make it work, though it's difficult. Um, some people included graphs as part of an appendix, so they said, you know, we can do this and and said that it was pushed to an appendix that we as the marker could see, but obviously the podcast couldn't. Some people did podcasts that had visual components, right, you, you see a lot of, I mean, it's not really a, it's not quite a podcast, it sort of straddles that line between podcasts and video where you have a pod where you're doing a podcast, but you also have a screen behind you that's showing stuff, um, and that's also fine. I'm sorry. I feel like most pod most maybe a strong word, a lot of podcasts these days you can watch on YouTube and they have them. You can see the people talking. That's a way to do it. OK. One of the wrinkles for this is, there's 3 different mediums you can use. One of the wrinkles for this is the, Peer review. As a component of this work, you will be provided with two classmates who will be your peer reviewers, and you will be the peer reviewer for two of your classmates. That's right. Either way, both of these things, right, so you'll be given two reports to peer review and you'll be sending your report to two people, and you'll receive an email with a list of who you, who you're receiving from and sending to, um, much later in the in the semester. Um, so you are required to create a draught that is at least somewhat, that is at least mostly complete, so that you can send it to your peer reviewers. You're required to. Look at the work that other people have produced and give them feedback and we'll talk about how to do feedback as we get much closer to the time, you're required to give feedback to them, and then as part of your final report, one of the things that goes into your final report into your into your appendices is, Your peer review comments and how you incorporated your peer review comments into your report, or for particular comments, why you chose not to, right, the comment might say, I think you should do this modelling and you say, no, look, I, I looked at that and it just didn't work out and it wasn't interesting, so I decided not to include it. And that's fine, right, you don't have to include everything they suggest, but if you don't include it, you have to say why you didn't include it. Um, so the peer review is there for a couple of reasons. One is so that you have to do a draught, because draught drafting it will mean that your final product is much, much better, but also it means that someone else has seen your report, you've had feedback from it, you're able to improve based on that feedback, it's a, it's a, it's a nice feedback mechanism. Um, it seemed to work well last year, so I'm pushing through and continuing it, yes. Appendencies do not count towards word limits. It's a good question, but the, it's a quick and easy answer. Any other questions on, because the appendix can be quite like the, the peer review is typically a like half a page is a longish one, but it's not unreasonable. So if you've got two of those and then your comments on how you use them, you could easily get a page and half of stuff, which is quite a lot of your 1500 words. So no, appendices is not counted, yeah. Specifically, how does it work? Um, you'll receive an email in week 10 saying please send your peer review to these two people, you should expect to receive work from these two people. Um, you deal with it internally yourself, right, you send your work off to the 2 people, you receive work from those two people. We'll talk about how to do peer review, you then do that. We'll talk about that in week 10. Um, you do that and email it back to the people, so it's all, it's all, it's decentralised, we don't, you don't have to send us anything, it's just done internally. Is that, yeah, after after, yeah.

SPEAKER 3
situation just Yeah.

SPEAKER 1
This is a good question, these are, these are excellent questions. I will actually open up the class summary to help with answering this question. Oh good. Um, so the question was, like, what happens if you don't do it? Basically, um. Come on, don't make me put a login in. Oh good. Oh good. No, I don't want to do that. OK, um, I'll just tell you, so the peer review is worth, so, so first of all, because of the way this is all set up, it doesn't, it doesn't come up that you don't receive peer review comments back. Because while the peer review comments are worth 0%, and whil while both sending your draught to someone and receiving and sending comments back to them, um, are worth 0%, they are a hurdle requirement for the course. Which means they're 0%, but you have to do them, and if you don't do them then you get an MCN for the course. Everything else you do in the course was, I mean, nice to learn, but assessment wise was not relevant, um, because you receive an NCN for the course. So it's, it's a harsh line, but it's the one that we've got, which is. It's worth 0 because we're not marking it, we're not gonna see your comments, where, you know, as long as your comments aren't completely terrible, it's fine, right, it should, you should try because it's benefiting your, your classmate, but we're not assessing how well you do it, um, but if you don't do it, then it's uh non-complete for the course. I'm just, so, but if it's, it's not managed. Sure, so we do receive, you, you, you might get an email from a student saying our person hasn't sent comments back yet, and then I would email them saying, You are late on this, you have one day to do this or you MCN for the course kind of thing, so yeah. I think we had 2 people who were late last time, and they both got to it very quickly when we were like. You need to do it or you fail, yeah.

SPEAKER 2
We manage the the blend. This theory, theory that we learn the course and then. Contemporary research, so if we're doing something like rent control caps or capsule insurance. Yeah. The impact General, yep, um, so you should be doing,

SPEAKER 1
you, you must include material from the course because it's required, like, part of the assessment is how well do you, how well can you apply the material from the course. If you're working in something where there is a really useful thing that's outside the course, it's great to include, but if you're doing, for example, a standard report, like a, a standard report, this is kind of, I mean it's functionally an essay introduction, body, body, body conclusion. If what like at most you would have one of your body paragraphs being something that's just complete, there's something that you've you've pulled from elsewhere, there's an extension. So you'd have sort of 22 or 3 from this course, and then 0 or 1 from outside. I'm not, yeah, so this is this is not the first time I've run this, but I'm not gonna give examples from previous years because my previous experience in other in other areas giving examples from previous years for this kind of long form report is that it makes all of the reports from the year you gave an example from really, really boring because they're all the same. Because everyone follows the same structure and makes the same kinds of arguments and it gets really and it's, it becomes really boring. Um, and it's not the point, the point is to, to think about it yourself and to come up with your own arguments about stuff. Um, so no, examples will not be provided. Yeah Um, is there, is, so, so I'll, I'll, I'll, I'll answer very, very quickly, but then I do want to talk more about this. Um, for the missemester exam, there's no final timetable, but the draught timetable almost never changes. Um, I can't say it won't change, but in my experience over many years, I have never seen it change. I say it won't, but like, that's, that's, that's the phrasing I'm happy with. Yeah, and who they, if they said if they said Friday of the week after week 6, then they would then they mistook the the week and it's meant to be Friday of week 6. but I don't want to talk about the mid-semester just now, I'll talk about it later, yep. You won't have seen the draught, I've seen the draught timetable. Um, I'm letting you know in advance of when the actual official things come out. It is in 2 weeks, I know, look. I know I am with you on this. Um, there's a few more things to talk about here, so any questions, any questions finally on any, any other questions here before we talk about the other couple of the third little wrinkle on this. Let's talk about peer review, we've talked about um multiple formats, we talk about peer review, and the one final component. Ah, to mention briefly here is you may, if you wish, work in groups of up to 3. You don't have to, there's no pressure to do so. If you want to, you can work in groups of up to 3. Um, the length limits change a little bit as you'd expect, because 3 people should produce a longer report than 1 person does. Um, the standard changes a little bit because mostly it's a, it's an increase in length, so it's an increase in breadth and a little bit of depth, and like we're, you know, we're a little bit more careful with mark like stricter with marking of, of group work but not significantly, um, and so if you want to do this, then this is fine, this is good to do. If you have someone you wanna work with, work with them, and if you don't have someone you wanna work with, don't work with them, and that's fine. You may work in groups, you don't have to. If you are, just make sure that when you submit this to turn it in, when you submit this, only one person submits to turn it in and then make it abundantly abundantly clear that it's group work. Ah and that and that's what we need. You can't have multiple people submit because then turn it in says these two reports are the same, you're like. Thanks, it's not helpful. OK, those are the, sorry, those are the three wrinkles. The one last thing to say is, is in red is. Um, you must choose a piece of media. That was produced in this year, right, so we're looking for contemporary things, it has to be have made this year, you can't have had something that was made in a previous year or released in a previous year, it's stuff from this year. In limited cases, if you send an email and say this thing came out in December 2024 and it's perfect for me, we'll be go whatever, or if we say, you say there's this piece of newspaper from last week and also this other newspaper from October of last year is directly related and I really want to do these two, that would also be, you know, we would also say fine, but broadly speaking, this year, right, contemporary material, it's what we're looking for here, because we want contemporary stuff. And that Completes what we talk about, um, you must include bibliographies as you'd expect, you must, I don't care about the, Referencing system that you use as long as it's complete and consistent and a referencing system, I don't care which one it is, um, if you're used to one of them, use that one, if used to a different one, use a different one, I don't care. OK. Thus ends the things I want to talk about for this. Question, further questions, yes.

SPEAKER 4
Uh academic.

SPEAKER 1
The media we start you decide to take on would typically not be academic, um, so we're looking for popular media stuff, so when I, and when I say popular media, I, I, I do mean popular economics media, so popular is maybe a strong word, but like, We're not looking for you to look at journal artic like academic journal articles here, we're looking for you to look at newspaper articles by the economics correspondent or by um Greg, someone who's posting a lot less recently, but we're looking for newspaper articles from, you know, the Guardian or, The Australian or or whatever. Or YouTube videos from, yeah, not, not academic um sources. Easy question. Yes, we have like this.

SPEAKER 5
Ask you to check Absolutely, totally fine.

SPEAKER 1
We're very happy for you to come to consult and say I'm, I'm doing these, I, I, I'm thinking of these pieces of media and we'll say, yeah, these are great, or this is really not app um or to bring not not bring a draught, a draught is a bit much, but you could bring, you know, I'm thinking of, I'm doing these pieces of media, I'm thinking of talking about this, this and this, and we can, we can spit all ideas with you, that's, that's completely fine. We're here to help, happy to help, right. Useful. OK. Final questions about. The assignment. Obviously have a look through it today, but it's not due for a long time. There are, you know, requirements and recommendations, um, make sure that you, I would strongly encourage you to start thinking about this from now-ish, right, you hopefully, as either economics students or PPE students or people who are interested in economics, I'm hoping that you do see these things in popular media, that you see newspaper articles that talk about economics or you see, The economic subreddit or you see, Ah, what is it? The, the economics YouTube, there's a bunch of them, or you listen to Planet Money, like as economics students or PPE students, I'm hoping that you have those things already. Start thinking when you see those, would this be an interesting one to talk about in a report. Cos it's better than not doing that. OK, questions. Questions on the exam. Are there any questions anyone has about the exam that's coming up in 2 weeks? Hopefully, one must assume. Yes. Double-sided. Yes. Pardon, sorry? The mid-sentence structure will be quite different to micro one, micro one, my micro one at least, I think also Ralph's uses a pretty rigid structure, like a pretty well-defined structure, this is, this is much more free form, this will be, here's a short answer question, it's worth this many marks. It's not a short answer question, it's worth this many. Excuse me. Short answers. In some cases, short answers with multiple parts, but short answer questions. I think we decided on multiple, last week we on, sorry, on Wednesday we decided we would also have a multiple choice section, um, probably about 25%, 20 25%.

SPEAKER 2
Is the way you do multiple choice where it's like 4 correct answers.

SPEAKER 1
Ideally, no, I mean I don't normally do multiple choice, but no, it'd be more like, There's 4 the normal way for multiple choice from my, from my perspective is there's 4 answers, 2 are wrong. One is kind of maybe right if you squint really hard, and 1 is correct. Um, and so that, and so you were looking for the one that's correct, not the one that's like, well, if you, if you take the extreme case and you then do this and this and this, then this can sometimes be true. But yeah but but A is just right. It's always phrased as what is the most correct answer because. For that for that reason. The wise question Cool. Alright. Content Uh, so we finished up last time talking about, where were we last time? We solved our baseline case. For a two-per model, choice over two periods with a pretty standard utility function, pretty standard log utility function, and we've got these nice little results where we consume. Where we consume in period one income divided by 1 plus delta, where delta is the amount we care about tomorrow, um, so delta typically 0.9, 0.95, those kinds of numbers, um, and in period two we earn interest on what we saved. And then we consume all of that because there's only 2 periods in the world, and, and for this particular numbers we ended up getting that we consumed more in 2. Because we care about period to only 5% less, but any money we save, but when we save money, we get 10% more money. And so, therefore we save more than we spend, therefore we, we, we, you know, spend more in the second period. We also did some comparative statics for a change in the interest rate. And we worked through all of this and we ended up saying basically that if the interest rate goes up as our shock, Then regardless of anything else that's happening, We really should be expecting to see that we consume more next period and how much we consume this period, we don't really know. We might consume more this period, we might consume less this period, it's gonna depend on an income substitution effect because we're richer but also saving is more valuable, so it's, it's not clear which is the way to go there. Any questions here? I don't think we do the next one, do we? No? Any questions here, questions, problems, yes. Sure, so D is not a possibility because, so our point to here which would represent spending less in the future, isn't gonna be possible because when we do our breakdown into substitution and income effect, substitution effect is clear, right, saving is more valuable, we save more, right, the, the price of savings has gone down, um, and so we save more. Then we come to income effect. Can we come to our income effect. Now for our income effect, we're relatively richer here because the price of price of consuming in the future has gone down. Relatively richer means that we would have to know whether the good is an inferior good or a normal good. And I can hand wave this, but I can go in a bit more detail because the question's been asked, um, and we know that consumption in the future is a normal good. We know that we know that intrinsically, it must be the case that consumption in the future is a normal good, and that's kind of always true. Um, it's always true because the consumption in both periods faces the same utility function, um, and so you would, you know, faces the same hedonic utility, same same intra-period utility function. Um, and so the only way for two consumption to be inferior is a period 1 consumption was also inferior, and you can't have consumption in both periods being inferior because then everything's inferior and we, as we talked about, that's not possible. Um, so because they both have to be either both inferior or both normal, and you can't have them both be inferior, they have to both be normal. It relies on the utility function being the same in both periods, yes, absolutely. So because of that, if you have more money, you're going to spend, if you have more income, just a flat income effect, you're going to spend more in both periods, you think normal goods, that means our income effect means we spend more tomorrow. But if our substitution effect says spend more tomorrow and our income effect also says spend more tomorrow, then our total effect has to be spend more tomorrow, because the total effect is just the sum of those two things. That's one way to look at it, that's the way I think of it. I think that's the conceptually, the nice way to look at it. If you want to focus on this mathematically, we know that our optimality condition, Says uh we wanna have the the that the. Discounted Um, interest rate affected. Marginal utility in both periods are the same. If we have more to to keep this equation true, if we have more money, we would need both C1 and C2 to increase in order to make sure that marginal utilities stay the same. You couldn't have C1 increase, but C2 decrease because then the marginal utility of C1's gone down, but the marginality of C2 has gone up. Um And so it's also comes, if you want to view it that way, it also comes with the optimality condition. If you think about it more, as I say, more mathematically. I think conceptually is more helpful. That addresses your interest, lovely. Um, whereas for C1 we don't know, right, C1's normal goods, so we're richer, so we buy more, but also it's relatively more expensive and so we buy less, and we don't know which way around that goes. For a change in the interest rate. Any questions, questions, concerns, otherwise. Let's do our particular case, where we do a change in the interest rate, but for this specific log functional form. And we worked out a little while ago we worked out some some utility functions for, sorry, sorry, the consumption levels for the log utility form, right, so because we have log utility form, we know that consumption today is, make sure I don't make a mistake. I over one plus delta. You know the consumption tomorrow is our interest rate. On our savings. If we wanted to, we could expand this further as 1 + R, I minus I over 1 + delta. And so for our special case here. We, we, and you know we care about this special case partly cos it's easy to work with, partly because it's empirically pretty close to accurate. Our special case here says that when interest rates rise, our consumption today has no effect, right, there's no effect on consumption today because there's no ah in this expression, right? Our if interest rates are 0%, we consume I over 1 + delta today, and if interest rates are 100%, we consume I over 1 + delta today. And so these two, and so for this particular utility function, our substitution and income effects directly cancel each other out for the, for the consumption today. Uh, so I'm not gonna draw a whole new graph, I'm just gonna say, well, look, it's, it's here. Right, if we consume, if we have a particular log utility functional form, then the thing that we would move to is we would move directly up when the when the interest rate changes, when the relative price changes. There are income and substitution effects for C1 directly cancelled. And again, empirically, this feels like it's not totally unreasonable, at least for small changes in interest rates, this feels fairly reasonable, I think. Um, the interest rates, you guys probably don't notice this as much because you guys don't have either savings or debt, I would hope, or not hope but like I would expect in most cases. I have, Debt, a lot of debt because I have a mortgage, um, and the interest rates changed recently. You may have been aware, right, Tuesday, a week and a half ago, whatever it was, last, actually it might have been last month, but anyway, the, the interest rates changed somewhat recently, and that didn't really have any impact on my consumption today, right? I was happy, it was nice, I was happy, I was happy because I expect to have more money in the future because I no longer face as high interest rate, um, cause for me interest rates are, are bad, I mean debt, so lower interest rates are good. Um, but in terms of effect today, yeah, it didn't really make a difference. I didn't suddenly increase my expenditure today because the log is pretty close to correct for most people, most of the time. Questions, questions, concerns. Compare that, yes. We did it, we, well, we kind of did it before, um, so this C1 here, we kind of did it last, uh last Wednesday, but just to go through it again cos we'll, we'll do it a little bit more formally. Um, it comes from the optimality condition. Comes in no small part malady condition. For the particular case for log utility. Uh, the marginal utility is one over. We don't like fractions, fractions are a pain, we want to get rid of them, so we multiply both sides by C1 and C2. So we get how much C2 is as a function of how much C1 is. Hopefully this is all fine, this all looks fine, I'm pretty sure. We also have as an additional condition, we have our budget constraint. We have our initial, our budget constraint which says that our income is 1/1 plus RC 2. And C2 is delta times 1 plus R and so substituting that in, we get income as C1 + 1/1 plus R. Delta 1 plus R C1. The One Plus Is council. Income equals C1 outside of 1 plus delta. Which is C1 is. I have a one plus delta. So just solving op. Last time, to be fair, on Wednesday we solved it with the numbers already substituted in earlier on, but you can do it without doing that, right, yes. Work through C1 is is this much. Again, for this particular functional form, right, so it's a result for the log functional form. Alright. Does that answer your question? Yes, excellent. Any questions otherwise, problems, concerns? the time Yeah, Tre has no efficiency one. So, our other main comparatives, I mean you can talk about an income change but it's kind of boring. The much more interesting one Is a change in delta, a change in how much we care about the future. And this is tricky because, and it will end up being tricky, but it's tricky because we're talking about a change in preferences. So this is not just a shift to the budget constraint up or down, it's not a pivot of the budget constraint because of change in prices, it's actually a change in preferences, which is normally really, really difficult to analyse, but here we can actually get some stuff out of this. Um, before we go to our analysis, our proper analysis. Let's take a step and try and use our, try and use our intuition. And see if we get anything. Suppose we have a shock where delta increases, Delta being how much we care about the future. Right, so delta's somewhere between 0 and 1, normally it's, you know, I suppose it goes from 0.9 to 0.95, and we care more about the future. What would we expect? To happen to C1 and C2 if we care more about the future. This is not a hard, not a super hard question, but you know, there's intuition here. Yeah, we should kind of expect to be spending more tomorrow and less today because we care more about the future and our budget hasn't changed, so we can't spend more in both periods or anything like that. It seems pretty likely we're gonna spend more tomorrow and less today. That seems reasonably straightforward. And if we go to our, you know, if we go to our special case, which I probably should have done first anyway, if we go to our special case, we see that, right, so we've got a special case, if if Delta goes up. Then one over then I over one plus delta gets smaller, which is to say we're spending less today, and we're spending less today we have more savings, which means we have more money tomorrow. So for our special case, absolutely, it's definitely the case that having Delta go up means we spend more more tomorrow, less today. No, no difficulty there. So, special case. Yes, tell us what we want. But that doesn't necessarily mean that it always happens, right, we need some sort of slightly stronger argument than that, um, so we'll do our slightly stronger argument than that. So we'll start off with. The world before the shock as usual. This is our world before the shock. And then the shock happens, and the shock is difficult because our budget constraint doesn't change, but our preferences change, right, because recall, Our utility Is utility from consumption today. Plus Discounted utility from consumption tomorrow. And so with delta changing our utility function has changed and so we get different in diff we're gonna get different in different curves, our preferences have changed. We start off with an in we start off with indifference curve maps. I'm gonna get rid of these, but like in principle, we start off with all these indifference curve maps here, and we happen to lie on IC one. And after the shock we're gonna get a new set of indifference curves, which means they are gonna pierce the old indifference curves because our preferences have changed. We can't compare the preferences before or after, our preferences have changed. So, the question is, how do our preferences change? And the thing that's going to be useful for our analysis is to look at the marginal rate of substitution, because the margin of substitution is the slope of these indifference curves. And so we can say, well we, we say our mars substitutional, that's the marginal utility of, Consumption in period 1 over the marginal utility of consumption in period 2, like derivative with respect to, uh, of big utility with respect to change in consumption 1, derivative of big utility with respect to change consumption 2. And so this is the marginal utility in C1, let's see if we can write that better. And we get the delta. Marginal utility Of consumption in period 2. And so we can pretty quickly read off that if delta goes up, Then the marginal rate of substitution at any particular consumption bundle. Goes down, right, Delta's in in the denominator, so when delta gets bigger, the whole thing gets more. So at any given consumption level. The monitoring of substitution is gonna be lower. It doesn't mean that everywhere it's low or it doesn't cos monetary substitution is, you know, it's very different up here where the monetary substitution is quite high, than down here where it's quite low. Um, but at any particular point, the monetary substitution's gonna have to be smaller. And so for example, we know that at at our initial consumption bundle, the marginal substitution's gonna have to be lower. So we're gonna have An indifference curve that's flatter. If we're up here, we're gonna have a flatter indifference curve, if we're up here, we're gonna have a flatter indifference curve, if we're over here, we're gonna have a flatter indifference curve. So our indifference curve maps have changed in such a way that they've become at any, at each point, they're flatter. Which we were able to work out by looking at marginal rate of substitution. Because we care less about the future, because we care less about the future, uh, more about the future, sorry, we care more about the future. Any questions, questions? Problems, concerns, the argument there. So given that, let's draw in a oh no. Let's draw in a bunch of our indifference curve maps. So in blue, which hopefully looks a bit different, it does good, um we have our new, we have some of our new indifference curve maps. And so if we want to find the one that's optimal, we want to find the indifference curve that's just that's gonna be tangent to the budget constraint, which is gonna be in here somewhere. It's gonna have to be in here somewhere. So we get our Our new consumption bundle. We started off here with. See one star. C 2 star, and we changed. See one double star. C2 double star. And the thing that happened is what we expected to happen. Right, which is that we spend less money today, more money tomorrow, but we've made an argument that holds not just for a particular utility function, but for any risk averse utility function, like any normal utility. Which is nice, right, we're able to make pretty strong, we're able to justify pretty strong claims, and fortunately those strong claims match your intuition. It's always annoying when you can make a really strong claim and it doesn't match your intuition, it's very disappointing, but here we get what we would expect to get. Which are able to justify it a bit more. Question? That's it, that's that's all of this particular little bit. There's more stuff today, obviously, but any questions, questions, concerns, problems for comparative statics. I'd say obviously you can do a change in income, I would encourage you to do it, we won't do it here now. And you can do a decrease in Delta, it's the same, same thing, but in reverse. As you'd expect. Problems, concerns. Here ends our section on comparative statics, we have a couple of other little things we will push through and do a little bit more before we, before we have a break. So, right back at the start of this, we said, Um, That we had, we had this very specific functional form or very specific way of thinking about choice over time where we talked about separability and we talked about the utility function being the same in every period and we talked about having a delta discount rate, um, And those things are all fine and most modelling that you do should be set up like that, but it's entirely fine to think about other kinds of ways of talking about choice over time, right? It is entirely possible that you think hedonic utility should change over time. You might be, you might have in your mind that today I don't need much money because of the way I am today, but I expect to receive that to receive the same amount of happiness tomorrow, I'm gonna actually need more money than I have than I have now. Right, that's, that's a thing that you might think is the case, you expect that in the future you will like currently you live at home. And that gets and so you can be reasonably happy with a relatively small amount of money, but you expect in 3 years to no longer be living at home and you know that you'll need more money than to receive the same level of happiness, right, and so then you would, you would think, well, I probably should use a different hedonic utility. Hedonic is, is the intra-period utility, um, over different time periods. And that's fine, right, there might be circumstances where that happens. Um, it might be the case that you think that consumption today should impact your utility function tomorrow. There's a lot of evidence that suggests that this second point is the case, that your consumption today has a big impact on your utility tomorrow. It's the it's this idea of what you're used to spending. If you're the kind of person that is, that gets by pretty happily spending $100 a month, and, well, that's probably unreasonable $500 that's too much. What's a reasonable amount of money, reasonable but lowish amount of money to spend per month on stuff. $25 How do you eat? We'll say 300, right, 300 is low, but you could, ignoring rental costs, you could probably get by if you really, really pushed, really pushed. Let's call it $400 because then you don't have to push quite so hard. You spend 400 a month, and you're the kind of person that just sort of plods along and you spend $400 a month on everything except rent, um, and that's fine for you. If you suddenly massively increased your expenditure to $800 a month, that's phenomenal for the month you do it. But then maybe your $400 that you then spend in the following month feels crappy, right? You were really happy spending $400 a month previously, but then you realise what $800 a month could get you, and now going back to $400 is awful, right? And that's this idea of this second one, is that the consumption today directly affects the way you think about utility tomorrow. The way you think about your consumption or the the happiness you gain from your consumption tomorrow, and again, empirically there's a lot of evidence that this does happen. Um, and there's things you should do to mitigate this. Um, Maybe you think that there's something different about the way we should be thinking about discounting. Maybe it's not just that each day in the future or each year in the future discounts you by the same, by the same amount, maybe there's some sort of difference, maybe there's something else that goes on. Um, one we will talk about later is what we talk about is called present, present bias, um, so our beta term is our, is, What we call present bias, which is why there's a a beta cos it's B for bias. And so this is this idea of, on top of Delta each period going down, on top of our our our interest in the future going down by Delta each period, we also care additionally about today compared to tomorrow, compared to any other day in the future. So 1 year to 2 years' time, we go down by delta, 10 years to 11 years' time, we go down by delta, but today to 1 year's time, we go down by the delta for it being a year, but also by an additional beta term because it's because we care about today on top of just discounting over time. We care additionally about today as well as counting time, so we have a present bias. And this again, empirically feels like it seems to be a thing that does actually happen. And we'll talk more about that at the end of today, a lot more about this at the end of today. So you can do these other other modelling options, people do these, behavioural economists do this, um, even regular economists do some of these things at different times, so they're they're not unusual, um, but they are all out there. Do 1 or 2, do one more thing and then we'll have a break. Any questions though on alternative things we could have chosen to do? We will do one of them. Cool. Uh, last thing I think before we take a break, yeah, um, is we've done two periods. Is there something to be gained by talking about choice over more than 2 periods? Uh, and the short answer is, I mean, obviously a little bit because most choices are over more than 2 periods, uh, right, you say you have your income, but you have to spread your consumption over the next end periods, right, so more potentially more than 2. Um, it means graphs are all but completely useless to us because we can't really talk because uh you're talking about an end dimensional graph and that's a huge pain. Um, and so if we want to think about our way at least of thinking about our choice over many, many periods, is you can talk about making sure that the opportunity cost of consumption in each period is the same. So in the too good case, that was our kind of our our our intuitive argument that we made for the too good case, which was that if we spend $1 today, we get the marginal utility. If we instead take that dollar and save it and spend it tomorrow, then we get discounted because we're spending it tomorrow, but interest rate affected because we have it saved for a year, um, and then the marginal utility of that dollar tomorrow. Um, so that's that, that's that's the second point here. But if there's lots of periods. Then we could take our dollars today and save it to spend it in period 3. Right, in which case we would get. I did fix this in the other notes, but I haven't fixed it here. In which case, because it's 2 periods in the future, we have to discount twice because we're 2 periods in the future, so we get delta squared, but also sat in the bank account for 2 years instead of 1 year. Um, so it's, so the amount of money we have would be 1 plus R squared, and then we get the marginal utility of spending in that period. And so if we have more than 2 periods, what we're looking at is taking our income and spreading it across so that the discounted interest rate affected marginal utility in each period is the same. Because if they were different, then you would move money around to the one that has the highest effective marginal utility, and that would, that would increase your overall utility. Um, so you make sure all these things are the same for multiple periods. So it doesn't, there there was a question about this last time, so I'm glad we got to it. Um, so it doesn't add that much interest, but there is something that we can do here. Any questions, problems, issues here? Lovely. In that case, we'll take a short break and we'll start back at probably at 11 o'clock, so 7 minutes, but we'll start like bang on 11. Thanks. If you have any issues, you can come see me now, else we'll start at 11 o'clock. Thanks. Um Ah, there's 2 points here. First off, exams are never stated, and if there is standing supplies, it's applied to the final course. There's reasons for this, it's a. it Yeah. Um done, if I'm, um, my experience is that the assessment should. Is that there's usually for my courses very little. There is scaling, it's usually like on top of, uh, uh, you would never scale down, that would be insane. Um, if you scale, it's a bump off of 1 or 2 marks, 12 quarter. amount of scale Um, there is no, your law, yeah, there's, there's absolutely no, there's no curve or anything like that, right, if everyone gets mentioned, amazing, I am super excited. shift that into the. If No, that would be on that would be one. if it was a, if it was a, if it was an exam just harder than man would it be? I have any mistakes that exam it's incredibly difficult. Um, then you would scale it again to allow that. Um, but if it's a normal exam. And everyone just does absolutely terrible. In principle That would never happen in a class with life. We got a. including print. wouldn't Yes, they're not There's rough estimates um in the sense that if we. Something is unusual compared to the rest of the college, then we have to say why they're unusual. But there's no specific, there's no specific numbers and they're pretty, they're pretty wide. So if I went in and had 30% bail rates, I would have to justify that, but as long as I could justify it ahead of time. Similarly, if I had 30% HD rates. Yeah Otherwise it's, it's something like 10% higher distinction. 30% It's is vaguely roughly the bread yeah. Thanks. Hey, um, just all this talk about like behavioural economics that we're thinking, what actually goes on in the behavioural economics course and how's that a bit different to what we talked about? It goes into a lot more detail, so we'll cover, we will like, like here, I'm like, you can do this in behavioural they'll do it a lot we don't do much of it here, we're gonna do a little bit of the last stop point um so they, they, they'll do like, 3 weeks on the last do point or 2 weeks on, like they'll they'll spend a lot more, a lot more time and effort on these things, and they'll also cover stuff, a lot of stuff that we will not touch at all, right, we're gonna do absolutely no behavioural game theory, uh, we're gonna do. Um, we do. No behavioural choice under uncertainty, right, we didn't, we didn't do that, um, but if you can. You can spend weeks doing it, you can spend a career doing it, like you can spend weeks doing it, um. They'll, yes, um, so there's a few other topics that they, and then there's also just sort of standard behaviour which we haven't touched on, um, yeah, so there's lots of, there's lots of stuff certainly. Thank you, Cool, thanks. I does it have to be good. How gonna be for the. we I'll sort it out, but yes, you'll be given another group that you work with, yeah, so it'll be groups will match with groups, videos matched with videos, podcasts with podcasts, reports with reports, um, as far as possible. Cool. Alright, 11 o'clock, and I promised we'd start right on the dot. We have one quick question that I'll just address quickly now on the peer review component. Um, first off, you won't be ever required to find a peer review or you'll be given the people that are, that you're gonna peer review and that that are gonna be your peer reviewers. Um, the system will be set up so that you would, In advance, tell us what kind of report you're doing and tell us in advance if you're working in a group or not, and I'll make sure to be matching group work with group work, individuals with individuals, you know, video producers with video producers, podcast with podcast, report with report. Um, so you'd be, you'd be, um, peer reviewing the same kind of thing that you're doing. And that's kind of important because part of the peer review component is you seeing what other students do and going, And going either, oh god, these things are garbage, I'm so happy with my report, or going and looking at their reports and going, oh no, I, my report is terrible compared to these and and thinking that you, you know, and thinking about other ways that you can do stuff, um, is, is a big component of why we have the peer review. Cos otherwise you can go through your entire degree without ever seeing another student's work, right, that would be quite common. Have you, has anyone here ever read a report from another student that isn't like their immediate friend that they're helping? Some people, a couple, right, 3 or 4 people, 5 or 6 people, but not many. And it's, I think it's useful to have seen what the kind of thing that other people are doing. OK. So, we'll move on. Our work so far on choice over time has been talking about consumption streams. Here's our income, how do we split that as a consumption stream? Um, but quite often what we see is we have potential income streams that we're choosing between. Um, because we're talking about income streams, we no longer have to worry about things like our utility, we can just talk about value because a dollar is a dollar, right, um, so we can move money around freely, so we don't have to worry about, um, we're not not consuming in any particular period, we're just receiving income in different periods. Uh, and then we would, we would then choose how to consume, and on the, the then part is where you have utility, but for the income streams we want to be able to, um, to think about them. And so we have a couple of different income stream options, right? We could, we can think about these two choices. We own a we own a factory, and we're thinking about do I buy a fancy machine which costs $1000 now and will give me $50 a year for the next 10 years, and then I know that in 10 years I can sell it for $500 and I know that I face interest rates of 3% per year. Is that better or worse than a different machine that only costs $300 upfront, will only produce $40 a year for the next 10 years, and then after that time will be broken and we'll be scrap and worth nothing, and also interest rates are 3% per year. Which one of these two opportunities is the better one? Which one generates more, which would you choose, right? How would you, how would you go about comparing these two potential income streams? Who picks A? Who picks be? Who would really like a system to be able to actually help them decide how to choose these things? Hey, everyone, right, um, cause it's not clear. I, I would, I, I would think it's not clear. If you've done if you've done like finance 101, this probably is very clear, but if you're not, this is, this is not clear what what the best way here is. And so one way that we can think of it, to me, the obvious answer is, well, if we look at these two streams of income, how much money are we gonna have at the end of this stream of income? Like how much, how much cash do we have at the end? Right, money today that I get today goes into a bank account and earns 5% interest, whether whatever the interest rate is for end years. So money today is really valuable because it's gonna go into an interest, it's gonna go into an account for the full amount of time and earn lots and lots of interest. Money you spend today, you're borrowing, and the debt grows at 5% per year, so spending money today is, is really bad because you, you're not putting that money in the bank account, you're borrowing money to get that, and so you're having to pay a lot of interest on it if you spend money today. And similarly, right, in one year's time. Spending money is not so bad, right? Money, sorry, you you get in is not quite as good, because it only stays in the bank account for minus 1 year, right, for not the full amount of time, 1 less year, so it it accrues less interest. And similarly, borrowing money in the future is not as bad because again it accrues less interest, but interest here is bad. Um, and so one way of looking at this is what gives us the most, it's like what gives us the most money at the end. And you can do this for every period, right, you do, you do this for every period. And so what we can talk about is we can talk about net future value. The net future value of our income stream is the amount of money we're gonna have at the end of the income stream, the value of the income stream in the future. And working this out is not that challenging, hopefully, the net future value is when we look at our income that we have today. And it goes into a bank account, I think I call this actually I er yeah, our, our, our today income, and it's gonna go into a bank account and sit there for, End years 10 years? 10 years. So I make sure I don't make sure I have the same answer I do later here. It's just making up for 8 years. And if I know is positive, this is really good, if I know it's negative, this is, this is not so good, um, because it's then accruing lots and lots of interest over time. If it's positive, then it's accruing lots of interest over time. That's, that's good. And then income I get tomorrow, that goes into a bank account, but it only goes into a bank account for for end minus 1 year, for 1 less years. And in 2 years, the income I get in 2 years it goes into bank account for, One less year. And so on. Right, and the income I get right at the end, I just get it and then time ends and I think about how much money I have in total. So I'm getting in income period, this is how much money I'm gonna have in my, my bank account at the end of the end years. And that's it really, it's. It's this thing There's no trickiness to this really, well, the way we've done it at least, there's no trickiness to this, um, but this is, this is fine. Questions, any questions, concerns? Yes.

SPEAKER 2
The start of the period of the year.

SPEAKER 1
Yep Yeah, so if you, um, so the question just for the point, the question is, do you get the money at the start of the year, does money does interest accrue on the when you get money today, does the interest accrue end times or end minus 1 times is kind of the issue, right? Does it, does it accrue this year or do you get money at the end of the year each time or at the start of the year each time? The way I've described it, here you get money at the start of the year. Um, and then it accrues interest. It, in terms of comparing income streams, it shouldn't matter, as long as you're consistent with your assumptions, um, because, the only difference will be if you, if you get if this money came at the end of the year, All of these numbers would be reduced by 1 by 1 plus R times, um, so everything would be 1 plus R smaller, but that's for every income stream you could think about, it'll be 1 times 1 plus more, so the ordering of income streams stays the same. So it doesn't really, the the short answer is it doesn't really matter, um, as long as you're consistent, the finance people really care a lot, um, about first, the start of year versus end of the year, we're not gonna worry too much about it, as long as you're consistent and, In the case of questions, it would be clear and if it's not quite clear, you'd be given. Marks either way, because we're not that fussed, so. Any other questions? Yeah. Cool. So this is our net future value. You can also talk about NPV, which is what you probably have talked about. So the NPV of an income stream is the amount of money that you would need to have today to be able to afford the income stream. So it's the value of the income stream but viewed from today's perspective rather than. At the end of the time period's perspective, um, and so one way that we might think about NPV, Is if I have this much today, how much money will I have after N years? So if I have this much money today after N years I'll have 1 plus R times this much money, and so we wanna make sure that, sorry, 1 + R to the end. And so our NPV. If I have NPV today. Then in end periods I'll have 1 + R to the end times that much money, and so the NPV is related to the net future value according to this expression, right, NPV is is smaller than net future value, um, which is normally expressed as NPV is the discounted. Net future value So it's not very clear. NPV is the discounted net future value, um, and that's, that's fine, and so if you go through and you take your net future value and you divide all the terms by 1 plus R at the end. Then you get this expression for net future value. Ah sorry from NPV. It's I think it's harder to intuit why this looks this way, it's money today and then money tomorrow, but it's not money tomorrow. So the I1, it's not money tomorrow that's accrued interest, it's how much money would we have to have today to have I1 dollars tomorrow, and we would have to have I1 times 1 + R to the -1 today, because we had that today and we saved it, we would multiply that by 1 plus R and we would then have I1 dollars tomorrow. Um, so it's a bit of a strange setup, but this is the setup. I've hopefully argued this adequately well that this is OK, um, and so NPV is, Done in as done as is done as this expression here. Um, Yeah. So, I find net future value makes a lot more sense to me. The downside for net future value is net future value is going to depend a lot on which year you treat as the final year, right, cause it's gonna change a lot, whereas NPV is always treating this year as the, the year of interest, um, which has it has additional benefits. In terms of ordering, it'll be the same, you have this here, um. Yeah, it'll give our NPV, net future value give the same comparisons because it's just a, an up and down shift of of multiplying by 1 + R to the minus N or 1 + R to the end. um, so in terms of analysis, whether you're using net future value or NPV doesn't really matter. But basically any analysis you ever see on anything will always be NPV. NPV is the thing that people use to do the analysis. You can in principle use either, everyone uses NPV, right, everyone always uses NPV. OK. That's most of our work for this. Any questions, don't say yes. So it's because with net future value, we worked out net future value looks like this, which I think makes a lot of sense. If we take net future value and we divide by 1 + R to the N. That gives you NPV. And you're just dividing each, and you just spread this across each of the terms. To get This Is that OK? Was any questions, problems? Do I have a dot point on this? I do not have to put on this. Um, there is, we have cheated a little bit here, and NPV calculations can be a lot more challenging than this, um, in no small part because here we've assumed, for one thing we've assumed interest rates are not going to change. You might think that they will, and if you think that, you know, interest rates are going to change in, Three quarters or in a year or whatever, then you would have to have to make allowances allowances for that, um, and that can change things. Much more importantly, we've kind of implicitly assumed here that borrowing and savings attract the same interest rates, and that is objectively untrue. Right, borrowing attracts a much higher interest rate than savings does, um, and so if you really want to do this properly, you would have to keep track of your current stock of, of money and which of the, whether you're in a in a in a borrowing world or in a savings world, and you get different interest rates depending on which one of those worlds you're in. Um, so it's not necessarily as simple as this, but often that's ignored anyway, and this is the system that's used. Sorry. End of sentence, any questions, problems? Issues. As homework Because, you know, we should do these things, do some calculations, um, the calculations aren't that hard. I would encourage you to use Excel for anything like this, right, cause this is over 10 for all of these 10 years, plugging numbers into a calculator over 10 years is really tedious cos you've got 10 numbers, much easier to use Excel and use formulas, and I would encourage you to do this. The main thing to observe is that the ordering between A and B is gonna be the same for NPV and net future value. The levels will be different, net future value will be much, much higher, but the ordering of the, the ordering of it will actually net future value will be much lower in this sense, anyway, um, net future value will be different than NPV, obviously. But the ordering will be the same, whether A is more than B is the same in each case. OK. That's our finance Tangent. Questions, concerns. Alright, back to economics. So it says on Wednesday here earlier. We talked about choice over time for multiple periods using this formula. And this formula is called exponential discounting. It's called exponential discounting because we have delta, and then we have delta squared, so exponential exponential, and then delta cubed and then delta to the 4, and then delta to the 5, so this is why this is why this is called exponential discounting. The future is discounted and the discount increases exponentially, it increases by delta every time. Um, and so from 0 to 1. So for period 1 to 2, the change is the change in how much we care is delta. There's a multiple, there's a multiple of Delta. From 2 to 3. The change is another multiple of delta, that's why we get delta squared. From period 3 to 4, the change is another multiple of delta, period whatever in minus 1 tonne, the change is another multiple of delta, we're multiplying by delta each time. Uh, and so this is, this is how this how we want to think about this. Each period is delta less important than the previous period. And that's true everywhere, and typically, as I say, empirically delta is sort of in that 0.9-ish region, if you, if you map people's choices as closely as you can to this. But there's other options that we could discount, right, we could talk about our, what we're gonna call, I have actually here I call it hyperbolic discounting and that is a misnomer. This is quasi hyperbolic discounting. um, formally this is quasi hyperbolic discounting but it's called hyperbolic for for short. Because we could use other options, and it's not clear from data from empirics that people do do exponential discounting. In fact, it's pretty clear from data that people don't do exponential discounting. What you could do instead is you could, yes, here we go, if we could say, well, our utility from our consumption stream. Well, we get our utility from today, right, we'll just keep things easy and say, we get our, we get our utility from today. And then I want my discounting and then we can do our discounting for each time period. Do For our size of discounting. And we wanna mostly have a Delta discount rate, right, we're mostly gonna discount by Delta. It's a discount rate. But on top of the delta that we have in the first period, we also want to say that dropping from the first period, dropping from right now to the future, whenever, also incurs an additional penalty. And that's gonna be our present bias. So we care additionally about today compared to anywhere in the future. And so, 0 is less less than 0 is less than beta which is less than equal to 1. 0 is less than Delta, which is less than or equal to 1. So we care about each period as it goes by, we care delta and Delta less and delta less and delta less, and as well today versus anything else is also dropped by beta. And so Beta Delta, UFC 2. Made up That's what we got here? Delta squared beta, UFC 3. Delta cubed, beta, UFC 4, didn't leave myself enough room here. Delta 4 beta, UFC 5. And so on. Delta. And minus 1 beta. You've seen So the delta is accruing, but the beta is not cos beta is just a one-off today versus anywhere in the future. Bam. And this, this, well, this is a thing we could do, certainly, if you go again to empirics then you get something, this, this tends to match empirical data a lot more closely when you actually look at people's choice over time, um, this tends to be a lot more similar to what people actually do with things like, And beta is doing most of the work. Right, approximately. Empirically, if you do this, you get beta of about a half, and the delta of about 0.99, right? You care about today. About twice as much as anything else in the future, and once we're in the future, additional time is has a bit of an effect but not really very much. Seems to be how people are, it seems to be how people actually make decisions when you go in and look at the empirics. You know, roughly. Any questions, concerns? OK. So this is what we're gonna do, and we're gonna see and we're gonna work through a scenario. Right, we've been talking about the exam coming up soon, so you have the exam coming up soon, you're trying to decide when to start studying. You don't like studying, it's difficult, it's time consuming, you'd much rather be doing other stuff. But you know that the earlier you start, the less bad it's gonna feel to have to do this, right? It's gonna feel a lot nicer if you have 2 weeks to study for the exam than it is if you have 11.5, which is gonna feel nice when you have a week, which is gonna feel nicer than if you have half a week to study for the exam. And so depending on when you start, right, start today, you get -1utles if you start in in half a week, so at U2, at time 2, you get -1.5 utdles and and and so on, the different, different times that you could be starting this. We're gonna make our numbers really simple by having beta equals 1/2, which is about empirically right, and delta equals 1, which is pretty close to being empirically correct anyway, so that'll that'll do, that'll do us. And the question is, when do you start studying? And so Hopefully this is a reasonably straightforward question, we look at the utility from, Start at T equals nope. Utility from starting now. If you start now, you get -1 noodles because you're doing it and you take the full brunt of that -1 noodles because you're doing the study now. End of sentence, right? There is no There's no discounting. You could, nope, nope. Should be able to point with this. Alright, select maybe. You could start tomorrow. And if we start tomorrow, well, this is bad because we take a 1.5 hit for the starting tomorrow, but also it's tomorrow. So we discount for the fact that it's not now, that it's not now. And beta is a half, so this is -0.75. Which is better, we would rather wait till tomorrow. To start something. But we could wait, we could wait till period 3. Then that's a really big hit. But we halve this because it's the future, 1.125, and delta is 1, so delta doesn't have an effect. Um, so that's, that's worse than now and it's worse than tomorrow, and if we start in that time T equals 4, this is gonna be quite bad because we get that big hit, and yeah, it's the future, which is nice. But we also get that big hit. And so hopefully pretty clearly. Using this model, we start tomorrow. Because we looked at the analysis, we looked we looked at the utility we would gain from starting at different time periods and tomorrow is the best one. Any questions? Yes. So the idea was we're saying we're only studying on one day, every other day we're not studying. Broadly speaking, I am, I am making this work harder than it should be, but yes, we're thinking of, we're gonna study at a particular time. And you can think it was as we start studying, and this is the utility we get at that time if we start studying, but that does have other issues around how we talk, talk about it. Um, so yes, we study on our day and then we've done our studying. It's just nice if we do it earlier. What's the utility if we just don't study? Um, you fail the course and die, I don't know, does, it's not an option, it's not an option. I would not recommend it, no you, yeah, it's, it's. Not on the list. Um, so yeah, the idea here is you study for a day, you just want to do it early rather than late. Question?

SPEAKER 4
Yeah. After making the decision on day 1, you then make the decision again on day 2 and decide to do it the next day.

SPEAKER 1
Perfect, so there's a reason why this has multiple slides prepared for us, because of exactly that issue, because this is fine, right, if you're this person, but this is looking from the perspective, At time T equals 1, at time T equals 1, then we get utility from various choices, and if we go through our various choices, the thing to do would be to study tomorrow. But exactly as you say, because we have this quasi hyperbolic discounting, we no longer have what's called uh intertemporal consistency, our preference ratings, our preferences may change as time passes, because we could come, To tomorrow, right? We had today, we looked at these options and we said, cool, we start studying tomorrow and that'll be grand. We come to tomorrow. And we go through, we could start studying. Paste Paste Paste. We could start studying immediately, which is time T equals 2, right, we don't want us, we, we don't talk about how we would feel tomorrow if we had started studying today cause it's no longer a, a choice that we've made, so we don't have to worry about it. Um, we can talk about, well, what happens if we start studying tomorrow. Well then we get our minus 1.5. And it's now the full hit cos it's in the present because time has passed. Um, and so we that that's it, right, we just take the full hit. If we wait a period, then it's bad but we discount. And if we wait till timetables 4, it's really bad. But it's discounted And so your hypothesis is entirely correct, that initially we were like, we're gonna study tomorrow and then tomorrow happens, and then we say, actually it's fine, we'll study. Next time, Right, and of course this gets worse because, When we get to next time, then we have the same problem. Because once it is time T equals 3, we can start studying at time T equals 3, and it's bad, or we can wait. And it's not as bad and so we again keep waiting until the very last minute to start studying, and it kind of sucks because our hedonic utility is terrible rather than just being. It is an excellent question, it's what we're gonna use the next slide to to talk about. So it is a really good question and we will talk about it. Um, there's a lot to talk about there. Um, so this is our way that we might think about choice of time, so exactly your, your hypothesis of we plan to study tomorrow, tomorrow happens, we plan to study the next day, next day happens, we plan, study the next day, and, and so on. Who's done this? Don't be shy, my hand, sorry, this isn't me asking if you put your hand, this is, this is me saying I'm putting my hand up, right? This is a pretty common thing to happen. For any kind of bad outcome, this is a common kind of thing to happen. I'm gonna start exercising. I really wanna exercise. I'm gonna start tomorrow, and then you start tomorrow, tomorrow. And, and similarly here, right, um, we put off bad things to happen. Um, and this is, this is, I mean, in the literature, this is what's called a, Naive, quasi hyperbolic discounter, because each period they look at their options, they see the best one, and then the action they take is either, Do the thing or don't do the thing. Um, and they don't think about as your, as your as your possibility was, they don't think about the fact that in the future, then they're gonna change their preferences, right? But you sit there and you go, I'm gonna start exercising tomorrow. Not worrying about the fact of that your preferences tomorrow might be different than your preferences now. But we don't have to do that, so, but, but yeah, we don't have to do that, we can be. Sophisticated. A sophisticated, quasi hyperbolic discounter. But before we do that, are there any questions about the naive, quasi hyperbolic discounter? Which probably it's gonna go hyperbolic discounting. It's OK. So the sophisticated quasi hyper discounter is the kind of person who recognises that this behaviour is gonna happen, who says if I wait, then my preferences will change, and so I need to outsmart my future self, right? I need to act now in a way that recognising that my future self is going to have different preferences than I do. And also recognising that my future self is going to know that my further future selves are also going to have different preferences and I know that myself next period is going to be trying to outsmart myself from two periods' time. Right, so we're trying to do the best for ourselves now, knowing that our future self is gonna do the best for them. And our future self is gonna do the best for them, knowing that our future future selves will do the best for them and and and so on and so on. And so in terms of how we actually solve this, it's not, That is not how you spell that word. So deerated. Uh, and so the, the way we do this is not entirely obvious. Um, if you've done some, depending on what you did in micro one, this might seem straightforward, we're gonna be talking about backward induction. This is essentially, and we won't talk about this too much, but you can think of this as a sequential game where in period 3 your period 3 self is gonna make a choice, in period 2 your period 2 self is gonna make a choice, and period 1 your period 1 self is gonna make a choice. And so we can say, we can take all of our data, I'm gonna, I'm not gonna work out these numbers again, I'm just gonna use them. So we can say Here we're gonna have our self. So the perspective, self or perspective. And the relevant perspectives are T equals 1, T equals 2. T equals 3. And over here we're gonna have the action. Action being taken at. T equals 1 Tal's 2 T equals 3, T equals 4. Right. Um, And so we can talk about the, we can first off talk about the, the utilities, right, if we work today, we say if we if we're talking about from today's perspective and we act today, we get -1 as we worked out. If we're talking about today's perspective, but acting tomorrow, we get the -1.5, but it's in the future, so we discount it. To 0.75 minus 0.75. If we're looking from today's perspective, but thinking about doing the activity in in period 3, then we get the minus 2.25, but we get it in the future, so we discount it. And similarly here, minus 1.875. If we're looking at this from the perspective of being in period 2, there's no option. For acting in period 1 because we're already in period 2. So we can act in 2, which is acting in that period, right in your own period that you're in, um, and so we, we take the full brunt of the bad thing. Or we could delay And have a worse outcome but discounted or delayed even further but have an even worse outcome but discounted. And similarly for time t equals 3, right, this isn't possible, this isn't possible. And we either act in time T equals 3, which is the the now time, and you take the full brunt of the minus 2.25, or we wait, And we end up with this, and I mean in principle I guess you could have, T equals 4, but it's kind of, it's equals 4 self, but it's kind of boring, but I don't know, maybe useful for, Completion You have no choice, you must act immediately and you will receive minus 3.75. So our our our naive analysis that you that you, as, as you pointed out, our naive analysis is in period 1, we plan to act in 2. In period 2 we plan to act in period 3, in period 3 we plan to act in 4, and in period 4 we act because we have no choice. And that's what our naive person does, which a lot of us, probably a lot of, well I certainly and and Deborah in the room put their hand up saying that that's a thing they've done before. But, as we suggested, we might be sophisticated, we might be the kind of person who recognises that process and wants to short circuit that process and say, no, no, no. I know that I have lots of experience of doing the, the silly naive thing and just putting things off and off and off. I'm going to not fall prey to that because I know that if I wait, then I'm gonna keep waiting forever. And so we want to try and think through what this, what this sophisticated person does. And it's a little bit tricky. If you do it, if you do it from front to back, this is quite tricky, because as I say, when you're in period one, you're needing to think about what your period two self would do and what your period 3 self would do and what your period 4 self would do. What your period 2 self would do because your period 2 self is also gonna still be sophisticated, what your period two self is gonna do is gonna, is gonna be dependent on your period 3 and 4 selves actions, and, and so it's very, very complicated if you start from the beginning, from period 1. Which is why we don't, that's why we start from period 4 and work our way back-up, and then it's actually reasonably straightforward, so we do a backward induction process if you have familiarity with sequential games. We do a backward induction process, we say if we get to period 4, What do we do? This is an easy question, you guys can tell me. If we get to period 4, what do we do? We act cause we only have one choice. So we do it. If we get to period 3. We know that if we, we know that our our actual actions we can take are either to act or to wait. We know that if we act We end up with, again, from period three's perspective, if we act, I'm actually gonna use an A. If we act, we get 2.25. And if we wait We're gonna go later and we'd rather go later and wait. So if we were to get to 3. The best choice is to wait. In some ways this looks like it's about, it's a worse choice. I can see how you might think this looks like a worst choice on the basis of, uh, but if we wait, we end up getting minus 3.75 and you're kind of right, but we're not, we're thinking about this, we want to think about this from the perspective of the person in period 3. When you're in period 3, you don't, you don't care about your future self, right? Screw that guy, you care about now. Uh, and now you wanna wait. And so that would, that would be what you would choose to do in period 3. Is that OK? All good? Excellent. So we move back to our period two self, this is where it starts to get a bit tricky, because again, our actions we can actually take are either to act or to wait. If we act as easy, right, act, we, we act and it's and it's done. But if we wait We're giving the decision over to our period 3 selves. Right, we're we're delaying and we no longer get the choice. And so because we're delaying and no longer getting the choice, we're giving the choice to our period 3 self and we know that our period 3 self is going to choose to wait again, it's gonna choose to act in period 4. And that that and that ultimately you would act in period 4. Um, so we know our period 3 self is gonna wait again, period 4 self is gonna act in period 4. So if we were to wait, it's not that we get, This outcome, this outcome's not available to us, because waiting doesn't mean going tomorrow, waiting means going in two periods. And so if we were to wait, we know that we'll end up acting in 2 periods, acting acting at time equals 4. That's the kind of the tricky step. Questions, concerns. Issues. Is this clear? Is it OK? Cool, excellent. Cool, good. And so we're looking at our actions of weight of act now, get -1.5, weight, get -1.875, and so the best choice is to act now because that gets us a less bad outcome. It's not a good outcome, but it's less bad. And so we come to our period one person, and our period one person is looking at this and going, I can act or wait. If I act, I, I act and get minus 1. Or I could wait, and if I wait, well, then I then I'm giving the decision over to the person in period 2. And I know because I've thought about this very carefully, that I know that the person in period 2 is going to act immediately. And so I know that if I, if I wait, My 2 person's gonna act because this period 3 option, it's not really available, right, it's never gonna happen because the period 2 person would already have gone. This even this T equals 4, this isn't gonna happen because the period 2 person's already acted. And so I'm really choosing between acting now, or giving the choice to 2 and 2, and I know from thinking through it that period 2 is gonna act immediately. Until I get -1 or -7.5, and actually weirdly here I choose to wait. So the analysis here doesn't end up with you acting immediately, it ends up with you waiting for exactly 1 period, uh, which is a little bit strange. Um, if you have 5 periods here, you actually end up acting immediately in period 1, right, this is being driven by there being an even number of periods, which is a bit strange, um, but if you, if you push this down by a whole another period, if you, if you open up a T equals 5 option, um, where you is, whatever it is. 50% worse again, um, then you will act immediately, but here we act in the second period. We don't delay forever, we delay a little tiny bit. Um, which is fine, right, this is what our sophisticated person would do, and ideally, we would really like this if we were the sophisticated person, if we could, if we could commit and we could work these things out. Oh sorry, if we, yeah, even if we can't commit, if we can't commit, but we're sophisticated and we know what we're gonna do in the future, we would choose to delay once and then act at that time. That's it. Ends up being a lot better for us in period one, we prefer to be sophisticated. The naive, which is not. Always necessarily the case, strangely that though that may seem. That's most of our work. Is that accord with your intuition for sophisticated apart from this weird thing where we do actually wait one period? OK. OK. I That one I can definitely talk to, so um the, the, the period 3. Why, why? Period 3 acting, sorry, period 3 waiting is, is we say is preferred to acting, um, because we can really only compare, Because, because these are, I would, I encourage you to think of these as different selves, right, your future self is a different person than your current self. It has different preferences, you don't experience their hardships, you experience your own hardships, or you experience your expectation I guess of future hardships, um, and you just don't care about the future person, right? The comparison is not, The comparison should never be between, between periods, um, because they're just not comparable things to be talking about, right, when I'm talking about because we're talking, Because our utilities are representation of preferences, they're not anything else. So really all of, all that the numbers tell us is that our one person um prefers T equals 2 the most and then T equals 1, acting in now, which is better than acting at time 3, which is better than acting at time 4. Right, um, for the period 2 person, acting at 2, sorry, acting at 3 is better than acting at time 2, which is better than acting at time 4. Acting at time 4 is better than acting at time 3 and 4 is our only choice. Um, so we don't make comparison across different time periods cause it's not, not relevant, it's not an important thing. But we, but we kind of, we use the numbers in order to construct the preferences, and that's really all we can talk about. Does that make sense then for the, certainly the 3 to 4 issue? The fact that we don't act in period one is kind of a bit annoying, um, it's because it's, it's an artefact of the process, I guess, the fact that we have exactly 4 periods, um, because we, if we get to the last period we act, 2nd last period we wait, the fact that we wait in the 2nd last period means in the 3rd last period we need to act. But if we're acting in the 3rd last period, and in the 4th last period, we're happy to wait because we can, we're able to wait for just 1 period, we know that we're able to wait for a time period, in the 5th last period we would act, and the 6th last period we would wait and the 7th last period we would act, and so it flips back and forth between acting and waiting, and we happen to end up with period 1 being a waiting period, instead of an acting period, um. Might change this for future years and have 5 periods, cause then you do get the, the intuition working out, um, but yeah, so it's just an artefact of the process I guess that means we act in period 2 rather than 1. Does that kind of address your concern then? Um OK. Otherwise, concerns, problems. OK. That's most of what we have a couple of extra things to add quickly. This is suggesting that being sophisticated is is a good thing to be, right? You act more you act earlier, your your hedonic utility is a lot better, um, by being a sophisticated person because you end up actually acting in period two, which is fine rather than actually act rather than being a naive person who actually acts in period 4, which is terrible in the moment. So this is sort of saying you should be sophisticated. That's not always true. For bad outcomes, certainly, you want to be a sophisticated person. Being a sophisticated pulls for for bad outcomes that gets that get worse the longer you wait, um, which is you're waiting to start exercising, waiting to start studying, um, waiting to stop smoking, those kinds of things, um, being sophisticated is really good because you bring the, you, you, you, you bring the bad thing early, you end up doing it earlier when doing it is not as harmful. Um, For goods, when you're talking about things that are good and get better the longer you wait, being sophisticated can actually be a bad thing. It's really helpful to be naive and to say, oh I'll just wait one period, and then when one period happens you go, oh I'll just wait one more, and you just wait one more each time and you end up consuming really late when it's a really, really good thing to consume. Um, whereas being a sophisticated person, you would consume really early when it's not so good. So it's, it's not that sophisticated is better than naive necessarily, it's better for bads, it's actually worse, it's a worse place to be, you know how you view this, it's a worse place to be for goods, for things that are, you know, positives that get better as opposed to negatives that get worse. So the, the analysis is not not that straightforward. Um, this obviously has lots of real world implications in terms of personal decision making, it also has real world implications in terms of policy decision making. Um, because if you know that people have present bias when you're building your government policies, which a lot of you will be looking to do, that's a good thing to keep in mind, the fact that people have this present bias and empirically they, they do have the present bias, so you should be taking that into account, um, you should be saying, OK, well, we, we can't just give them these options and say, look, it gets worse over time, cos they'll say, yeah, but I'll start tomorrow, it's fine. It's not how this works. You can also do this for profit maximisation if you're going the other direction and don't want to help people but want to utilise this to extract more money out of them. You do things like um gym memberships that have a big upfront fee but a relatively low per unit cost, because the person goes in saying, yeah, I'll pay the big upfront fee, cos I'm gonna go every week, and that's much better, and then of course, each individual day, people aren't going because they'll go tomorrow. Uh, and so you can, you can extract quite a bit of money out of them doing that kind of thing. There are other fields where you might be able to do that as well. That's broadly it, any final questions for choice over time? Yes. Because like so Sure, so the distinction is when we're talking about, well, a way of thinking about distinction is when we're talking about a naive person, a naive person makes plans. And so the at at at time one, the naive person says, I'm gonna act at time 2. And that's their, that's their plan, that's their decision, their, their decision world is in which period am I going to act? And they're not bound by, and they're not bound by that, that's just they make a decision. And then ultimately the thing they do is either either act or don't. Um, but, but our period one person says, I plan to act in two, and naive period one person. A naive two person says I plan to act in period 3. How naive period, 3 persons that I plan to act in period 4. When we talk about our sophisticated person, our action space is much smaller. Our action space is either do it now or don't do it now. And you recognise that don't do it now has a particular consequence, that's a singular consequence that has to be the same whether you're hoping to do it in period 2 or hoping to do in period 3, it's don't do it now and, It is either do it now or don't do it now, and don't do it now is gonna give you some some outcome. So I'll talk about here is act and wait. Right, so actors do it now, or we wait, and those are all, those are our only two choices, um. And because, and so if we go to the period 2 perspective, because that's the, that's the handy one for this, um, in the naive person, they said, I would like to act in period 3 please. That was their plan. I planned to act in period 3. But our sophisticated person, our sophisticated T equals 2 person. Didn't have that option, their options were either act now, -1.5, or wait and leave it to a future person to make the choice. And they know because of the analysis that the future person would also choose to wait, and if they wait, if the period 2 person waits, they're gonna end up doing the activity in 4. Uh, and so the, the period 2 person wasn't see, do I act now, do I act at time 2 equals 3, do I act at time 2 equals 4. The sophisticated time 2 equals 2, they said, do I act now? Or do I wait and waiting ultimately, We'll be acting in period 4. You're just Yeah, yes. You're just thinking I can act or I can wait. If I wait, what'll happen? From the time tables one person, it'll happen in timetables 2. And from time peoples one, that's fantastic, right, I can exploit the fact that my future self is gonna act immediately and I can delay for one period knowing that my future self will act immediately and that's great for me. I You can think of it as being already factored into the utility function is our way of thinking about it. Um, you certainly could build models that work the way that you're sort of, you're sort of thinking about where, where there's a period zero self that's thinking about that, that wants to have a a weighted a weighted amount of the utility from the different people, from the different selves that will happen. Um, once you're in there, once you are the period one self, what you care about is your preferences. And your preferences are 2 is better than 1 is better than 3 is better than 4. And you know those might cha you know those might change? But you don't, it doesn't bother you that they might change, I guess. So this is the, the level of sophistication here is, You have your preferences, you're aware that they might change. But you don't care about that future self where the preferences might be different, you care about your preferences cos they're yours. And the future self might be different, but what will be different, but, but whatever. Screw him, is that OK? Ah, as you say, you could set this up differently as a person's zero self. The person's zero self would be would be more the person of saying, do I want to be sophisticated, do I want to be naive? Um, and here you want to be sophisticated, in other circumstances you might not. Um, OK, question, no, just moving. Any other questions before we finish up with consumer theory. Cool, we got a 4 minute early mark. Thanks everyone for coming in, and I'll see you all next week to start talking about strategic interactions. Thanks.
