SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
I Alright, about 5 past, so we will get stuck

SPEAKER 2
back in. Welcome back everyone. Week 4, week 4 semester is going onwards. Yay. Um, Uh, this week we're gonna be doing our last week of of strictly consumer consumer theory, uh, where we're gonna be talking about choice across time. Right, so we did in week one, in week two, we did our standard sort of too good model for generic too goods. In week three we said well what if we did a specific thing and we really talked specifically about uncertainty, which built in a bunch of additional restrictions and and a bunch of additional um like. functional forms to the utility functions, because you could talk about additive separability and probability of events and all that kind of stuff. Today we're gonna do something similar to week 3, but rather than talking about choice under uncertainty, we're gonna talk about choice over time. And we're gonna get a similar sort of additional structure and additional things that we can pull out of the fact that we're talking about decisions over time. Uh, so similar to week 3, but choice over time, instead of under uncertainty. For admin, there isn't much. I want to emphasise the, yeah, let's do this first. Uh, as we usually start, we start with admin. The mid draught timetable for the mid-semester exam has been released. I don't believe the final timetable has been released, but the draught timetable has. Uh, that has the final exam on Friday evening of week 6 from 6:30 to 8:30 p.m. Which isn't a great time because it is the Friday before the break, but it's the time we've been given, right, and I don't control this. Um, so the upside is, you get to have your exam before the break and you don't have to worry about micro too so much during the break, just sort of general catch-up and stuff. Um, the downside is, it is the Friday before the break, and if you, if the, if you were hoping to get away quickly on Friday afternoon, then, I can't, and you can't either, um, because we have the exam from 6:30 to 8:30, and that's what we've been given. So pros and cons. Um, content, all material, lectures, tutorials, everything up to the exam. Uh, week 6 will be a revision week, we won't, I won't put new material in the lectures in week 6, so both lectures for week 6 will be revision lectures, um. There will also be additional consultation times, there'll be lots of time to cover old to to to sort of recover things and and review things uh prior to the exam, but uh that'll happen. The additional consult times will be posted to Wattle. I may mention them next week, but certainly they'll be posted to Wattle in any case. I think we have 4 extra hours planned, all the same hours as normal, plus an extra 4. Any questions about the mid-semester exam. Questions, concerns, Yes. For, oh, so I can answer that in a couple of different ways. Um, with the mid-semester exam released, I will I will post a practise exam, um, which is last year's exam. Uh, so I'll, I'll do some minor tweaks to that and post that this week. Uh, I'll also post next week I'll post student solutions, so optimal sorry, really high quality student solutions to those problems, but I'll wait, I'll have a bit of a delay there so that some people at least can try the exam first and then see the solutions, um. Uh, and that'll give you an idea for the, for the format. It'll be a series of short answer questions. So there isn't a whole lot I can tell you about this. Oh, I do actually want to ask this. Multiple choice questions. I'm really on the fence about including or not including multiple choice questions, um, and I'm happy to take at least, Consultation here on whether multiple choice questions are a good thing to include, right, from my perspective, the pros are, uh, you can cover, you can cover that, you get more like better coverage, easier coverage of the material, the downsides are I don't really like how they ask questions in, or how I would ask questions in this in multiple choice, but I'm happy to take, Consultation, think for a moment on whether you would prefer to have multiple choice or prefer to not have multiple choice. Take a second to consider who who would like to see some multiple choice in that exam, mid-semester exam, who would not like to see it. That was fairly fairly overwhelming and I'm not that fussed, so there will be a multiple choice section to that exam. Um, multiple choice, yes. There'll be a short answer section as well, I want to be clear, the exam will still be mostly short answer, but there will be, you know, a quarter of the exam or something or a 50% of the exam will be multiple choice at the start just to fill out, you know, to give us better coverage. Um, there'll be some multiple choice questions and there'll be lots of sho and mostly short answer. The other question is on a cheat sheet, I'm generally in favour. Uh, cheat sheet is one page handwritten cheat sheet. Yes, cool, so cheat sheet will be a yes. Um, one page handwritten by hand, physically, on a physical piece of paper with a physical ink pen or pencil, um, is, is what will be permitted as part of the cheat sheet, um, a 4 page handwritten on both sides. Uh, which I believe is actually what I've also asked for, so that should be pretty sure I've asked for that, I'll double check that. Uh, you're allowed a calculator, you can bring one or not, it won't be particularly useful, but if you want to have one, you can bring it. It's how I normally do calculators. Uh, otherwise, any questions on mid-term exam? Concerns, problems. Cool. Excellent. In that case, next one. Choice across time. So this is our, our content now. Um, so for our analysis, so our analysis, all our, all of our analysis so far has been consumption which occurs all at once, right, we've talked about our consumption bundles where we talked about consuming all at once, we talked. Our um gambles, but there were still gambles which in a certain sense happened all at one point in time. But often, very, very often when we're talking about choices, we're talking about choices where consumption happens, where outcomes happen over a period of time, right? It's not just that you get something now, it's that you have to compare today, you know, things today versus things tomorrow, right? Do you prefer a dollar today or a dollar tomorrow? How much of income should you spend and how much of your income should you save, should you borrow, right, to to fund existing lifestyle, and these are choices over time, and our models, I mean you can kind of see how our models might do this, but like that's what we're gonna be seeing today and, and on Friday. But this is certainly different. Our models for time, like our models for uncertainty, our models for time are basically gonna be using utility over money. There's no special reason you have to restrict yourself to this. You can talk about bundles of goods today and bundles of goods tomorrow, you can talk about things that aren't money today, you know, time today versus time spent tomorrow or whatever. There's lots of different ways you can do this, but we're gonna just use utility over money because it's, it's easy and it gives us most of our insight. Do I have this here? Yes, excellent. And you can think about this the same way we did last week, we can talk about our time preferences, right, which of the following income streams would you prefer to take, assuming you would actually get them. You can either have $10 now, or you can have $12 At the last class of this semester, take a moment to think about which you'd prefer. Who wants the $10 now? Almost everyone, who wants the $12 at the end of semester? Couple of people. I would take the $12 I think taking the $10 now is, It's a bold choice, right, the implied interest rate here is pretty, pretty good, um, for the $12 at end of the semester, but never mind, um, but yeah, you can see right there's and there's clearly a choice across time, right, there's a there's a time dimension here which we haven't haven't investigated before. You can do more complicated time dimension issues, right? We can talk about having $3500 now or $10 each day, every day for the next year. And there's clearly a trade-off happening here, where the $10 each day every day for the next year is a bit more money in total. But $3500 is, is now, and so which of these is better or worse might be different for different people, who wants the money now? Who wants the $10 a day, that's odd, I feel like those choices were inconsistent with the choices in A and B, which is interesting, um. But you can see, right, there's there's choices, there's a choice to make here between these two different income streams. And so we want to be able to have some kind of way of modelling this because that's what we're here to do, right, we're here to model consumer choices. Any questions, questions, problems? Questions, problems, concerns. True. Alright, so let's think about our modelling. So we're thinking about a new model, we're building a new model and so we wanna go, we wanna start off with really, really high level, high level questions, right, which we've we've done a whole bunch of work so far. Maybe we can use some of that, right, so which parts of our existing model base, our existing knowledge base are gonna be useful to address this problem of choice over time, right? Maybe we need to make new assumptions when we talk about choice over time specifically, right, maybe choice over time has specific structural things about it that make it different from just generic choice over bundles of goods. And given those new kinds of assumptions that we're working with, what kinds of, Results do we get? And we saw exactly, we did, we did this, we didn't say it, but we did this for uncertainty, right, if we think back to our uncertainty, which parts of the previous models were useful, basically all of it, right, all of our too good model was useful for uncertainty, but there were new assumptions that we put on this, and there were new results that we got because of that. And so we got results like marginal marginal rate of substitution is the same along the certainty is an example of a new result that we got from those, from those assumptions, and we're gonna do the same thing for time. And so, let's talk about some of the, so we're still gonna, on the first one. Our two good model's probably gonna be useful. That's what we're gonna be using at least. What new assumptions are we gonna make? Specific for choice over time. So when we did our generic form, right, when we talked about the utility from A and B. From some bundle A, from some bundle containing a units of A and B units of B. We didn't have any kind of separability, we just had this, this utility function, which for bundles is what you kind of had to do because for bundles, the amount of good A you had probably changed the marginal utility of B and the amount of B you had changed the margin of A, and it was important to be able to have lots of different interaction between these terms. When we went to uncertainty, we separated this entirely, which for uncertainty made a lot of sense because in uncertainty, either world one happens or world two happens, but not both at the same time, and so if you end up in world one, what you would have gotten in world 2 doesn't matter, there's no interaction at all. And so in uncertainty it made a lot of sense to have full separability between the two different, between the utility from the worlds, which is why in uncertainty we had the probability of 1 times the consumption in world 1, plus the probability in 2 times the consumption of world 2, so entirely separated. When we come to time, we can ask the same question. Should our utility in our time consumption be separable? Should, should our utility from consuming, consumption in one and consumption in two, The sort of the utility we get from consumption in time 1, and the utility we get from consumption in time 2. Should we have this? And for time, I think it's a little bit less clear. Right, because we consume today some amount. And I can kind of see how what we consume today would affect the happiness we get from our consumption tomorrow, that seems, that seems like a reasonable thing that might be the case. But I can kind of see the other side of this as well, where we can kind of treat our time periods differently, right, the amount that I spend today makes me happy today, it doesn't make me happy tomorrow. It makes me happy today. And then when I come to tomorrow, I spend some money tomorrow and that makes me, that makes me happy tomorrow. And so what I'm thinking overall, I just have my happiness today and my happiness tomorrow and I can silo them, and so you can kind of see this going either way. We're gonna keep things simple for ourselves, and we're gonna say, Yes. Right, we're gonna have this nice clean separability where we talk about the utility we gain from what we consume today and the utility we gain from what we consume tomorrow, and we just add up the utilities from those two, those two time periods. Which is maybe reasonable, maybe not, if you do a lot of behavioural economics, they drop this, but maybe this is reasonable. Any questions, concerns, disagreements, strong disagreements with this assumption? OK, so we're gonna separate the utilities out. Then we get questions like should our utility function from different periods be the same, right, so should our utility, the the actual, you know, format of the utility function be the same. So here I had utility 1 from consumption 1, utility 2 from consumption 2, maybe they were very different. Maybe I really care, maybe I, I have, maybe I'm risk averse today, right, maybe I have downward sloping downward bending utility today, but tomorrow I'm risk loving and have upward sloping utility, right, maybe these are completely different utility functions between today and tomorrow. But that seems pretty unreasonable. Right, it seems pretty reasonable that the way I think about the way I gain happiness from consumption today looks pretty much the same as the way I, I gain happiness from consumption tomorrow. Maybe I maybe I wait the periods differently, maybe I care more about today and less about tomorrow. But in terms of the broad shape of the utility, it seems like it's, it's probably pretty similar, because my preferences aren't likely to massively change between today and tomorrow. And utility function is just a a representation of our preferences. And so we wanna say, yeah. Probably, it seems kind of unreasonable to have our preferences radically changed between today and tomorrow. So you want to have the same utility functions from different periods being the same, again, maybe with different weightings. And that's the last point, right, should we care equally about today and tomorrow, and here's where I want to say no. Right, and it's pretty clear, I mean it's hopefully pretty clear immediately that we don't want to care the same about today and tomorrow, but we said that as well, right back here in, Back here, if we cared equally about today and tomorrow, everyone should have taken the $12. Right, every single, because 12 is bigger than 10, right, this is not a hard problem, but we clearly care differently about today versus tomorrow, because a lot of people chose the most people I think chose the $10 rather than the $12. Um, so we, we do want to treat today and tomorrow differently. And so we wanna say, yeah, separable, yeah, the same, but weighted differently. When we're building, when we're building our utility function. Any questions, problems? C. And as usual, at least for our initial attempts, we wanna keep it simple. Two time periods, one good, right, amount of money, amount of money in period 1, amount of money in period 2, we have 2 periods, then the world ends, and that's all we care about. Right? We will talk about this with more periods, but like let's just keep it simple for our initial analysis. 2 periods, done. 2 periods, 1, good. Questions, problems? Right, so these, these assumptions here, particularly these three, but, but like really all of these, these assumptions here limit us down to very to a very specific functional form for our utility, well, not a very strict, but a moderately specific functional form for our utility, which basically looks like, looks like this, right, which says that our utility from consumption from some amount of money today and some amount of money tomorrow, as we consume C1 dollars today and C2 dollars tomorrow. Will we get some utility from our consumption today. And then we get some utility from our consumption tomorrow, but we care differently about our about today and tomorrow, and that's what this delta term is doing here. This delta term is, it's a D, so it's what we call the discount rate. And so it's giving us how much we care about today versus tomorrow. If we care more about today, which we basically always do, then this discount rate should be less than one. Because it means we underweight tomorrow. We get all when we think about our decision. We get all of our utility from today, but we get some discounted level of utility from tomorrow. Right, empirically, if you try and estimate this thing, this thing tends to come out. In How am I supposed to spell this? Empirically, experimentally, this thing tends to come out. At about 0.95, it depends a little bit over what time frame you're talking about, um, but it depends a surprisingly small amount about what timeframe you're talking about, um, but this thing tends to come out at about 90 at about 0.95, so we care, we care about the future a little bit less than today, about 95% as much as we do about today. This And that's our choice over time, right, we have, we separate it, we have the same utility function, so we know that our utility function is the same, the actual functional form of the utility is the same, uh, in period 1 and 2. And we care a bit less about tomorrow. This is our, this is our utility function. Our intertemporal utility function. Any problems? This is gonna drive our own differences. You good? hoping for more questions. With our too good model, we always had our two components, we had our preferences component, which we've just done, and we have our budget constraint component, which we're about to do. Um, so let's talk about our budget constraint component, our budget constraint, again, we're gonna keep things pretty as easy as we possibly can. Our budget constraint component is gonna have that we have some money now, we have some income now, with our income, we get to either spend it, Today, or we save it, put it in the bank, tomorrow it comes around, we take it out of the bank and we spend it. And so what that's gonna look like is we have I dollars today. We spend some of it Right, we spend some of it, we spend $1 today. And we save The rest Right, this is fine. And then we take that I minus C1 dollars, take that that money that we have there, it comes it's called S1, but it's not super important for our purposes, and we put it in the bank account. And that then becomes, that then earns interest. Which is a new thing because we're talking about choice over time, that earns interest, it earns interest at some kind of interest rate, we'll call that R. And so we then have 1 plus R. Right, cos that's earn interest in the in the in the bank account. And then we spent that. And then we spend that, and that's our consumption in period too. And because the world ends, there's no point saving any money beyond period 2. We spend everything. So while there are 2 numbers that we, we, while we kind of choose consumption today and consumption tomorrow, we really only choose, we really only choose consumption today. Because once we've chosen consumption today, all the rest of it becomes savings, all of that earns interest, all of that gets consumed in period 2. So it's really one choice variable which is how much we buy, how much we spend today. Is it the inside. Uh, we absolutely can extend the model out for however many periods we want, um, and you get a lot of similar insights, not exactly the same but a lot of very similar insights, um. You get a little bit of difference whether you extend this out a finite number of periods or an infinite number of periods, because you can do it either, um. But yes, and we will talk, we will talk about a finite extension. On Friday. We're starting with two periods because. We start with the, we start with the easiest thing and we build our way up. We actually won't, we won't do a full extension to end periods because it's harder than you'd think. But you can certainly. Any questions? Other questions. Thank you. OK, so this was kind of a lot that went on here in terms of how our income worked, but this kind of collapses to our budget constraint, which is money we have now and money we spend in and money we spend in total. And so our our our total money if we have I dollars right to to spend. So that's how much we have to spend, how much money do we actually spend, we spend C1 dollars today? And then we're gonna have some money in the future. And every dollar we save gives us 1 + R dollars to spend in the future, and so this just looks a little bit annoying but it is what it is, um, And so this is the current value of the amount that we that we end up spending. And if you go through and sub in C2 here, everything will cancel out really nicely, right, if you, if you sub in this C2 into this expression, everything cancels out really nicely and you get the this. Is our budget constraint, realistically this is our budget constraint. It's how much we have to spend after one in the second period, but if you rearrange that, you get this thing here for our budget constraint, and we tend to write it in this kind of form because this looks, hopefully, fingers crossed, looks a lot like what stuff stuff that we've already done. Because this looks like income is equal to. The price of consumption today times the amount of consumption today, plus the price of consumption tomorrow times the amount of consumption tomorrow, it's just that price today is $1 and price tomorrow is 1/1 + R. Because saving a dollar gives us 1 + our dollars to spend tomorrow. So for every $1 we don't spend today, we have 1 $+5 spent on. So we get this sort of inverting of the of the one plus R. Um, so this is our nice relatively simple, there's a bit of work to get here, nice relatively simple form for the budget constraint that looks a lot like our two period model budget constraint. Questions, problems. Question or stretch, stretch. OK. We've tried to keep things simple here, we have income only in one period, you obviously can tweak this to have income in both periods, but it doesn't really change much. We've, you can, you can have a a difference between a borrowing rate and a savings rate, particularly if you have income in both like put income in both periods and then you can have a savings rate that's different to your borrowing rate. It's fine, but it's fiddly and the extra insight's pretty, pretty small, right, it's kind of a lot easier for the insight to just say income now, how are you gonna split it between your consumption over time? What's your optimal split of consumption over time for that income. OK. And so we kind of have all the components here to be able to talk about our too good model, because we have a utility function. Which is basically just a utility function, we're gonna assume risk aversion in the individual case, we're gonna assume downward Boeing individual utility functions, uh, so, sort of this, the lower case U is gonna be downward, downward Boeing concave. Um, And that means we can graph this in the same way that we've always graphed this. For two good models, it's just consumption in period. One And consumption in 2 are our two goods, and we have a budget constraint, we can spend all of our money in one and we have I dollars. If we spend all the money in Prude one. If we spend all the money in 2, if we spent all the money in 2. We saved everything. So we have more money in period two because we saved it and we earned interest. Interest again, interest rates 5%, 10% are kind of interest rates that are reasonable to talk about for a, for a one year period. And our budget constraint then is just any line joining those same as it has always been. Any questions, concerns? Cool. And as always we have a, you know this is a two good model, so we have an indiffer so we have indifference curves the way that we normally do. If we assume risk aversion for the individuals, we get those bowed in indifference curves, and so we get, you know, we get an indifference curve. We get our indifference curves. And we get I call it A actually, and we get our optimal consumption bundle, where the marginal rate of substitution is equal to the price ratio, where the difference curve is tangent to the budget constraint. Same as we've always been doing. Questions, problems. Alright. We're now going to try and actually do a bit more solution to this, and we're gonna do it in two ways. We're first gonna talk about, We're first gonna try and use our intuition to think about the problem of choice over two periods intuitively and come up with what we think an optimality condition kind of is probably gonna roughly look like, and then we'll also throw some maths at this and see if our, our intuition is correct. And so our intuition should be that we have money, is it so we're trying to, we're trying to optimise, right, we're trying to maximise our utility, and so the thing that we're gonna want to be doing is making sure that the extra benefit we get from consuming today should end up being the extra sort of overall benefit we get from instead saving that dollar and spending tomorrow, because if, Same as always, right, because if the marginal benefit we get from spending the dollar today is bigger, then we should spend more money today and less tomorrow, and if the marginal extra benefit of saving a dollar and spending it tomorrow is bigger, then we should do more of that. And so we should end up with something like the extra overall benefit that we get from saving money from spending money now is the same as the overall benefit we get from instead, yeah, spending money, the same as the overall benefit we get from saving that money and having it and spending it tomorrow. And so if we spend the money now, The extra benefit we get, right, if we spend an extra marginal dollar today, Well then we get the marginal utility of our spending today. Right, that's, that's what marginality is, mar marginal utility is, right, we increase our spending today a little bit and we get the marginal utility we gain from spending money today. The other option of what we can do with our dollar is we can save that $1. And if we save that dollar, how much extra overall benefit do we end up receiving? Right, well we save the dollar, and so we end up with 1 + R dollars next period to have. Dollars next period. Are worth marginal utility we get from having dollars next from an extra $1 next period, which could be, you know, however much we have, so. But also we care less about the future, right, we have that discount rate sitting there. That discount rate sitting there meaning we care less about the future, and so we're gonna have to account for the fact that we care less about the future. Here I've said multiply out. I don't think intuitively that has to be the case, well that's obviously the case, but there's gonna be, certainly when we talk about savings and the overall benefit we get from saving a dollar, it's gonna relate to how much we care about the future, it's gonna relate to the interest rate that we can earn by saving money. And this seems pretty reasonable that it's, you know, the marginal from the extra dollar, the amount of extra dollars we have, and then we allow for the fact that we care less about the future. So our intuition of spending now has to be equally as valuable as saving now, so that suggests that these two things should be equal. So intuitively this sort of thing is I mean this is gonna be correct as well, but this sort of thing is what we would expect to find if we do this mathematically. Questions, questions, problems. I guess foundation for like when when you do consumption. I Yes, this is related to consumption smoothing. I'll talk about consumption smoothing later, but I, yes, it is closely related to consumption smoothing. Um, so this is what we kind of expect to see happening, and so, let's actually make sure that that that that is actually the case, right, because we had our, we had, we, we said that our our optimality conditions, the marginal rate of substitution is equal to the price ratio, um, and so our marginal rate of substitution is the marginal is the, Rate of change is the slope of the budget is the slope of sorry, slope of the indifference curve, and so it's the marginal utility of, Consumption today, divided by the marginal utility of consumption tomorrow. Recall that our utility, so just recall, I should have put this at the top, but recall that our utility function. Is U of C1 plus delta U of C2. And so if we take the derivative of this thing with respect to C1, delta is a constant, U of C2 is a C2 is a constant, so U of C2 is a constant, so all of that, that whole second half of the expression disappears, and all we're left with is it's the marginal utility of consumption today. Is the marginal utility as we change consumption today. Marginal utility with respect to C2, well, see if we're taking the derivative with respect to C2, C1 is a constant, so U of C1 is a constant, so that whole first half disappears. The delta is a constant, but it's a multiplicative constant, so we pulled out the front of the derivative, and we get Delta U of C2. So we get a nice expression for our marginal rate of substitution. Similar looking to what we had last week, not exactly the same but pretty similar looking to what we had last week. Questions, problems. I'll just finish up then, our, our baseline optimality condition says that the marginal of substitution should be equal to the price ratio. Um, so the price of the price of C1 was 1. The price of C1 was 1, the price of C2 is 1/1 plus R. So this is 1 plus R. And so since. Marginal utility of C1 divided by delta, margin of C2 is equal to 1 plus R, we multiply it by delta mogulative C2 and we get exactly the thing. That we said we thought we were gonna get is delta 1 plus R. Marginal utility of C2. Hey. We did cheat cos I knew the answer when we talked about the intuition, but still, we get the thing that we were hoping to get. Oh. So we worked out our optimal our optimality condition, our optimal consumption bundle is to do this, right, and this is similar looking to the what we had last week, but it's not exactly the same but it's kind of, kind of similar, right? Weighted weighted marginal utility should be equal. This does actually give us some. Some facts and some stuff that we can work with, um, one of the big things that we can work with here is that when our discount rate and our interest rate are related in the way that it is sort of natural, um, then we should consume the same in both periods, which is not super surprising. What this is, so and and the impact of this result is saying broadly, almost. If our interest rate's 5%, so any dollar we save is gonna be any time we save a dollar we're gonna have 5% more money next period. And also, we care about tomorrow 5% less than we care about today. Which is delta equals 101 plus R. Then we should we should consume equally in both periods, then we get our perfect consumption smoothing, right, consume the same in both periods because we want to have the marginal, you know, we need to make the marginal utilities the same, the way we do that is by consuming the same in both periods. Um, So one of the results says this, right? We get 5% more money from saving, but we also care about the future 5% less, and consume the saving both periods. Which is not unreasonable. It also means, you know, if delta is high, which is to say that we care more about the future. If we care a lot about the future more than the interest rate would suggest that we should, then we should consume more in the future. Right, no huge shock there, right, we consume more in the future. Similarly, if the if we care less about the future, then we should consume more now. None of this is hopefully, fingers crossed, super surprising, this just gives the like exact amounts by which we should be doing these things. Which is we compare Delta, the discount rate to 1/1 plus R. 1/1 plus R is about, Side. 1/1 plus R is about 1 minus R. When R is small, when R is, you know, 5%, 10%, these are pretty close. Um, and that's what's, that's why I'm saying, you know, 5% less than 5% more. What are we up to? OK. Questions, questions, concerns. We have more for today? You press forward. Let's look at a special case, special cases make our lives easy. Let's look at our special case, which is gonna be the special case we mostly look at, which is log utility. The utility from consumption is log of the amount of money. We use this as our typical special case for a couple of different reasons. One is when you look at people empirically, they tend to have something pretty close to this as their utility function for consumption, right, saying that every time you increase your consumption level by 10%, you become one unit happier. Right, this is what the log utility does for us. And so if you're very, very wealthy, you need a lot more money to increase your happiness because it's a lot more money to be a 10% increase. Um, our log utility, if we're thinking about this as a function. Yeah, uh, we're gonna have consumption and we have new tools. Log utility has, I mean technically it has this kind of shape. And so it's similar to our risk aversion. As I say, there's a couple of reasons we like this, one is empirically this seems to be the way people kind of behave, if you, if you, if you force the data to match to match some to match one of these graphs, this is the best one, Or a pretty good one at least, it also is nice because it behaves really nicely for things like differentiation, right, because the derivative, Of the log is just one over C, which is easy to, which is relatively easy to work with, whereas if you work with anything else, it's complicated, um, so we like logs for two reasons. As a as a utility function we like for two reasons, empirically it's pretty good, and mathematically it's pretty easy to work with. So we'll mostly use that for any special cases. Again, we're gonna take R being sorry delta being pretty much what we observe people having a 0.95%, and we're gonna take an interest rate of 10%. And we start off with income of 100, and we can, we can solve this expression, we can solve this out, right, because we know that we consume as we have, we have our optimality condition. And our optimality condition says that the marginal utility of consumption today should be equal to delta 1 plus R times the marginal utility of consumption tomorrow. As we just said, marginal utility is really easy, it's just 1 over the consumption level. So the marginal utility is 1 over C1. Delta here is 0.95. 1 plus R is 1.1. Times 1 over the sea. And so we at least get, we don't quite get C2, but we get C2 as a function of C1, right, C2 is 0.95 times 1.1. Time to say one. Which is Tells us at least that we consume. More in 2. Exactly this much more, but intuitively we consume more because we care about the future 5% less than today. But when we save money, we get 10% more money. And so not surprisingly, we. Consume more in the future. This amount more, we also have our budget constraint, if we want to solve this out properly, our budget constraint. And so our budget constraint says that income today has to be spent either tomorrow or, The next day We're given income today is $100. C2 is 0.95 times 1.1 times C1. Something in that value there, and we we solve this a little bit. 100 is C1 plus 0.95 C1, so 100 is 1.95 C1s. Which means C1 is 100 over. 1.95. So we're gonna spend a little more than $50 today. So we divided by a little bit less than 2, a little bit more than $50 today, we're gonna save the rest, and we're gonna spend even more than that the next day, because we spend 0.95 times 1.1 C1 the next day. And so when you go through and work out the numbers, you consume $51.2 today, you consume $53.6 tomorrow, the sum of these two things is bigger than $100 because some of the money that, all the money that you saved earned interest. Right that that's why the sum of these things is, you'd expect the sum of these things to be bigger than 100. Um, so because we could gain interest, we've, even though we've spent more than half our money today, we have even more money left over for tomorrow. We can graph this, I mean we could graph it but we don't, we don't gain much insight from graphing it, so, let's not. Questions. Questions, concerns. OK. We will do at least one comparative static, probably, probably this and the special case of this, and then we might finish up. We always like in economics to know how things change when we change stuff. Let's change the interest rates and see what happens. So we have our, we have our, actually we will probably need to model this, need to graph this then. So what we saw was consumption today, consumption tomorrow, we had our budget constraint $100 or $110 and what we found was that the best thing to do would spend a bit more tomorrow. So spend $51.2 today, $53.6 tomorrow, and that was the best thing to do for us. Budget constraint, indifference. But it takes, what happens when things change? What happens in particular, what happens when the interest rate changes? So the interest rate changing, first off, we want to know whether this is gonna be a change in budget constraint, or whether this is gonna be a change in our preferences. Remember our preferences are given by that UFC1 C2 equals UFC1 plus delta UFC2. And our budget constraint is given by I equals C1 + 1/1 plus RC2. So if our changes are we talking about a preferences change or a budget constraint change? Come on guys, help me out. It's on the board, on the board right now. Budge constraint change, right, we're talking about a budget constraint change cause it's changed in ah, but it's not a change in anything to do with our preferences. Um, So we go and we do our graphs as always, and we have our graphs, I. I times 1 plus R. And our initial consumption bundle. On our initial indifference curve, initial budget constraint. A shock happens, the shock is gonna be a, I'm actually gonna reduce the interest, uh, I really want to talk about increasing interest rate. The interest rate increases, shock. Increasing the interest rate. That means when we save money. It's more, it's more valuable to us to save money. And so from a budget constraint perspective, we save money. Every dollar we save, we can now get more from it. Because the interest rate's high. There's two ways to think about this change. There's two different ways we're gonna decompose this change in, in, gonna do a geek decomposition of this change. One way is we're gonna focus on this as a two period model, right? Think about this as in central choice. If we're looking at this from an intertemporal choice perspective, when the interest rate goes up, that means sort of, that kind of means two things. That means that every dollar I save is more valuable because I'll have more money tomorrow, is one way of looking at this problem is one way of looking at an interest rate change. In interest rates go up, yay, every $1 I save is more useful. The other way of looking at this change is, yay, interest's gone up. I don't have to save as much today to get the same benefit that I was gonna get tomorrow. And so there is this kind of conflict in our minds, we should have this kind of conflicting idea of interests go up. It's kind of unclear what's gonna happen to our consumption today. Do I save more because every dollar saved is more useful, or do I save less because I don't have to save as much to get the same benefit tomorrow? Uh, and it's not clear which of which of those is gonna be the case, so it's not clear whether we're gonna end up, like out here somewhere, consuming more in both periods. Right, that's, that might happen. Where we consume where we where we save less, but consume and consume more in both periods, but maybe we end up up here somewhere, right, where we, where we consume less today and we save, so we're saving more, because each dollar is each dollar we save is more useful, and it's just not, it's just not obvious which of these is the better choice. Um, And so We're gonna end up somewhere over here, right, somewhere up in here somewhere, but it's not clear whether we, as I say, it's not clear whether we end up, At Be Or at sea. Kind of could go either way. In principle, if you had, no, that's not true. Initially, you might think we could plausibly end up at D. D is gonna be ruled out by the particular form of our utility function. So we're not going to end up at D. What do you want to do here? But it's kind of hard to say what's going to happen. Uh, we can break this down into a substitution income effect, the, the, sorry, I will say, yeah, oh, we're all the time. Any questions? No, I won't take questions. The other way we can do this is we can use the models and the methods we've built up over the last couple of weeks and we can say income substitution effect. Right, and that's gonna give us some, that's gonna give us some some results, right, so our shock was that the real interest rate increased. Which really is saying that the price of consumption tomorrow has gone down. Right, this is really saying that sort of the price of consumption in the second period has gone down. Is a way of thinking about that because that's what's happened on our graph, right, we look at our budget constraint shift, that's, that's clearly what's happened. And so we can talk about, well, the substitution effect, we can talk about the income effect. And then the total effects. Yeah, we'll be right. Uh, and the effect on how much we consume today. And how much we consume tomorrow. And so the price of good 2 has gone down, good 2 is relatively cheaper, that means substitution effect wise, we should buy more good 2 and less good 1. We should consume more in the future. Because it's cheaper. And our income effect is where we get to rule out some things, because our income effect could, you know.
