SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Alright, 5, actually 6 passes, it's 5 past, so we will get started. Welcome, oh jeez. Oopsie doopsy. Welcome back everyone for week 5 now, really pressing on in semester. Uh, week 5 is our first week of something a bit, well, it was a little standalone week, which is a little bit different. All of weeks 1 to 4 really were consumer theory, right, and building up consumer theory. Um, we could jump from there to talk about producer theory, that would be the normal flow of events, but given that we have 1 week of content, And then the exam, having one week of computer theory doesn't really get us very far. So instead we're gonna throw game theory, gonna throw our week on strategic interaction, so game theory in here, and that'll be great because it's a nice little standalone week and then it we can put it into the mid-semester exam. Um, and also I, at least from my perspective, strategic interaction flows pretty nicely on from consumer theory. Um, consumer theory is all about individuals making choices to maximise their utility. We have this sort of thing so far. So far the system, the overarching system we've been using is for each choice that you have, there's some utility that you gain from that choice, that. Be the utility, because that might be where CR consumption bundles and UFC is the utility of that consumption bundle, the choices might be uh gambles that you're choosing between, and then we talk about the expected utility of the gamble or the consumption stream that you have over time, and then this is the intertemporal consumption stream of that utility. But in all cases it was this idea of, here are your choices, each choice that you have generates the utility that you get from that choice. And you choose the choice with the highest utility, that really was our big broad overview of the last 4 weeks. Hopefully that was a big broad overview of the last 4 weeks. When we go into this week is we're gonna introduce a really big wrinkle into this because we want them to be able to talk about a lot of real world situations, situations where the utility that you get, that you will see isn't just dependent on the choice that you make, but also on the choice that other people make. Right, and there's lots of circumstances where it might be that it's not so much there's a choice C, there's a utility from that choice, choose the C with the highest utility because there's the choice that you make. And then there's the choice that other people make, and the utility you get depends on that choice and other people's choices, and which choice that you make that gives you the highest utility might depend, might be different for different choices that the other people are making. And so there's no longer that nice, clean, make the choice that gives you the highest utility because maybe choice one gives you the highest utility if everyone else is being passive, but choice two gives me the highest utility if everyone else is being aggressive. And so which choice do we make, which is the optimum choice is gonna depend on other people as well. And so our study of that is game theory, the study of strategic interactions. We talk about interactions, um being strategic when the action of each player affects their own payoff, as usual, right, the choice you make affects your outcome. But it also affects the outcomes for everyone, affects the powers for everyone else, right? Super widespread use in, I mean economics, obviously, it wasn't developed for economics, but it's, it's sort of the dominant um paradigm in microeconomic analysis is is game theory, um, you can use a lot of politics, so I know for the PPE students here, you have to do a course in game theory, and you can either do the course. in game theory that we run, or the course in game theory that the politics school runs, right, so it it it's a transdisciplinary tool that's used in lots of different places. I think, is there another option as well? Is there like a, is there a philosophy school option as well? Yeah, and or a philosophy school option, right? So it's it's, it's clearly fairly widespread. The mathematicians also do game theory, but they do combinatorial game theory, which is quite a diff I mean there is links but it's a different kind of object that they work with generally. Uh, you can also look at a lot of biology stuff, right, in terms of evolutionary dynamics, follow game theory principles, depending on exactly how you structure them, and you can talk about evolutionary game theories it's own little branch of game theory, um, but you can, as I say, you can use game theory to look at, look at, Evolutionary processes in biology as well and and competition processes in biology as well. So it's a really broad thing that we work with here. Anytime when you have different groups in your society, different groups interacting in such a way where the actions they take affect other people as well as themselves, in a, in a significant way. Any questions, questions, problems, concerns? Lovely. You've all seen, I don't, sorry, I should say as well, now that we have our instruction out of the way, I don't think there's any major admin to talk about for this week. The uh the mid-semester exam is next week. practise exam is posted, the solutions are there and they'll go public on Monday, so you have time to practise the exam before you get the practise solutions, um. Are there any questions about admin of any kind? Well things I should talk about. Yes. The extra workshop questions. Oh, in tutorials. Yep, sure, um, so I think in most cases we have, in the cases for the tutorial questions that were not gotten to, they have been posted, I believe. There's only 2, there's there's, there's 2 weeks where we didn't get to a question cos it was not really designed for us to get to that question, and those solutions have been posted already, yeah. Oh yeah, I was gonna say like you mentioned like

SPEAKER 2
the previous subject to like. Like stuff from like week 6 sort of, is that still a thing or?

SPEAKER 1
So the, the, the, the content being covered is any content that is covered before the exam. The week 6 lectures will be review lectures. So in the week 6 lectures we'll be doing review material. I'll talk more about that on Friday, but broadly speaking, we'll be doing uh review material in those week 6 lectures, so there won't be any new material in that. Week 6 lectures in, yeah, when we knew those week 6 lectures, uh, the week 6 tutorials, which are based on the week 5 lectures, that stuff is accessible because it's still week 5 anything we've done in the course up to then, but there won't be any new lecture material in week 6 that so it won't, and therefore it won't be accessible because there's no new material. The questions Fantastic. Content. So who did game theory for at least one week in micro one? Excellent. So we're gonna be building from that, right, we're gonna recall a bit of that, but we're gonna be building on from that, obviously. Right, so when we talk about our game theory, our games have 4 main components, or 3 main components, depending on whether you include information or not. Like, the players that are in the game, the actions they can take, the payoffs they receive, and sometimes we might also want to talk about the information held by the players when making their actions. That that can be a useful thing. We might not do this in a lot of detail, but that can be something useful. Uh, when we talk about games, so players' actions, payoffs, maybe information's relevant as well. Uh, when we talk about what we're doing, we're gonna be talking a lot about best responses. So a strategy for a player is a best response to the strategies of the other players, if taking the other players' actions or strategies as given, right, so taking the other actions as given as though they're not changing. Then this is the strategy that gives the highest payoff. This is what I talked about way, way in the introduction. If everyone else is passive, then the best thing to do is to be passive, and if everyone else is acting aggressive, then the best thing to do is aggressive. That's your best response, right, is is whatever is whatever that is. Um, this is a, this is a best response. Is for a particular player, and for specific strategies of the other players, you can talk about the best response. We can talk about, so this is just a notational things, we can talk about a strategy profile. A strategy profile is a list of strategies one for each player. So we, your profile is just strategy for player 1, strategy for player 2. 34567, or however many players there are, one strategy per player. Questions, problems, I'm blast through some early stuff cos it is a recall. And we recall dominance and dominant strategy and Nash equilibria. Dominant strategies are when the game is really boring. Right, because a dominant strategy, if a player has a dominant strategy, players dominant strategy if they have a best response that is the same best, that is the same best response to anything that my opponents are doing, right, it doesn't matter what my opponents are doing, the best thing for me always is to, I don't know, whatever it is, act passive, act aggressive, whatever, whatever the whatever the thing that is. There there's always our best there's a best thing that is the same best thing regardless of what my opponents are doing, which kind of defeats the purpose of strategic interactions, it's saying, I don't care what you're doing, there's the best thing for me regardless. And and so, as I say, it makes the games boring, and we have these. What makes the games extra, extra boring is when we have dominant strategy equilibrium. And so a strategy profile as a strategy for all players, is a dominant strategy equilibrium, if this is a strategy, if the strategy of each player is a dominant strategy. So if every player has a dominant strategy, Then the strategy profile that consists of every player's dominant strategy is a dominant strategy equilibrium, and it's extra super boring because everyone's doing the best thing and what they're doing is the best thing for them regardless of what anyone else is doing, and so they just, they just do that. And there's really like there might in principle be strategic interaction but there kind of isn't really, right, because my best thing to do doesn't depend on what you're doing and your best thing to do doesn't depend on what I'm doing, and so we both just do the best things for ourselves. Is the dominant strategy equilibrium. Questions, concerns. Cool. Um, the way I've structured the wording of this kind of suggests that there's lots of games, there's lots of interactions which don't have dominant strategies and dominant strategy equilibrium, um, and so this is why we also have our notion of a Nash equilibrium. So a Nash equilibrium is a bit of a more complicated object. It's not saying that you have a best response to everything your opponents does. It's saying that if we look at what everyone's doing. Then no one could change their action, no one could on their own change their action to do better, no-one could do a unilateral unilateral positive deviation, right, could unilaterally change their action and they end up doing better. So everyone is doing a best response to the strategy the other players are actually doing. As our example, we talk about driving on which which side of the road we drive on. Right, there's no dominant strategy for driving on which side of the road, it's not always better to drive on the left or always better to drive on the right, um, but it's clearly a Nash equilibrium, right, if everyone else is driving on the left, you also want to drive on the left. If everyone else is driving on the right, you also wanna drive on the right. Um, and so if everyone else is driving on the left, if everyone's driving on the left, no one can improve their situation by starting to drive on the right. If everyone's driving on the right, no one can improve the situation by starting to drive on the left. Um, so these are Nash equilibria. Thus mostly ends the recall, it's just definitional objects. Any questions, concerns about any of these things here? We good? Great. So Let's do some history, first off, because it's useful to talk about the development of the discipline. So these things, like there's a reason why these things are called game theory, why this is called game theory, and it's called game theory because it was initially used to study what we sometimes now call like parlour games, so particularly poker is one of the big ones for this, but chess chess go, um, card games, it's kind of why we call this game theory, because it's used to study, it was initially used to study these kinds of games. And what you notice for these kinds of games is that they're what are called zero-sum games. They're games where there's a winner and there's a loser, and you might win by lots, but if someone wins by lots, then someone else loses by lots. Um, and so these, it's a, the sum of each outcome is zero. If I win, you lose, if I win a little, you lose a little, if I win a lot, you lose a lot. Um, and so Given that each person is trying to maximise their payoff, that's kind of equivalent to saying, given that I'm trying to maximise my payoff, and I'm playing against you, if we're in this zero-sum world, me maximising my payoff is kind of the same thing as me minimising your payoff. Does this make sense? Because our payoffs are we're diametrically opposed. The better I, the better I do the worse you do. So if I want to do as well as I can possibly do, that means I want you to do, I want you to do as badly as you can possibly do. Yes. Cool. In these kinds of zero-sum worlds, strategies that are called maxim min strategies are a lot of sense. Maximin is I want is to maximise the minimum that I can do, the minimum outcome. So when I'm choosing my strategy, I'm gonna choose my strate because I, yeah. Maxim a strategy is a maximin strategy, so maximises the minimum if it maximises the worst possible outcome that the person can receive. So you pick your strategy so that the worst thing that can happen to you is not too bad. So you're taking the action with the least, as it says here, with the least ability to be exploited, the least ability for your opponent then to figure out a way to utilise the action that you've taken to hurt you, because they're trying to do as well for themselves as they can, which means they're trying to do as badly for you as they can. So we're taking that action that has the least action to be, to be exploited, this works really well in zero-sum games for the reasons I've just talked about. Your opponents trying to maximise their payoff, and trying to minimise your payoff. You're trying to maximise your payoff, you know that whatever you choose your opponent is going to exploit any weakness that you have, right, if you leave some some way for them to, to end up winning, then they're gonna do the thing that wins, which means you're gonna lose. And so you wanna take the thing that makes it hardest for them to win, makes it hardest hardest for you to lose, I guess, um. You want to make your weaknesses as small as possible. We'll see an example. The example will help. We'll see an example first and then take questions. Alright, so we have this game here. This is our normal form game, this is how we're gonna mostly write down simultaneous games, um, the payoffs for simultaneous games, we have 2 players, 2 is usually how many players we'll have, you can have more, but it gets annoying. So we mostly have 2 players. Here, 2 players have 3 options each player one plays top, centre or bottom, player 2 plays left, middle, or right. Um, the first number accrues to player 1, the second number is the utility that accrues to player 2. So as an example, if player 1 plays top and player 2 plays left, that's a bad example actually, if player 1 plays top and player 2 plays middle, Then player one gets -1 neutral, right, player one loses by $1 and player 2 wins by $1. Whereas if player 1 plays top and player two plays right, then player 1, player one wins by $2 player 2 loses by $2. This is how we read this graph. We hopefully quickly see that especially for at least for player, I mean for either player, but for player one, there's no dominant strategy, there's no thing that's obviously best for player one, because if they play top, top is really, really good if my opponent plays right. Boredom is really, really good if my opponent plays left. centre is really, really good if my opponent plays middle. And so for player one, the best thing to do really does depend on what player two is doing. I think you can and you can do a similar similar kinds of arguments for player two, right, if, if you expect to see, um, top, you want middle, if you expect to see bottom you want middle, if you expect to see centre then you then you don't care. So we can build these best responses. But we can also talk about the maximin strategy, the strategy that we can take, but yeah, yeah, we want to see that what we want here is we want the maximin strategy. We want to find the strategy that maximises the worst possible outcome that we could receive. And we'll see why we care about that in a second. So if we go through them we go player one first. If player one plays top, what's the worst thing that could happen to them? Someone can tell me here, what's the worst outcome they can receive? No, that's the best outcome. If 2 plays right, they get 2 oodles and they're loving life. Yeah, that's why this is why we ask the question, so it's helpful. Um, so the worst thing, so the worst thing that can happen is, is player two plays middle, right, and they get and they end up with uh, with, with minus 1. The worst thing that could happen is they get -1. If player one plays centre, what's the worst outcome for them? 0, right, because every outcome is 0. Um, and if they play bottom, then the worst outcome is that they get -1. So again, we're just focusing on the worst outcomes. And so if we play top, the worst outcome's -1, if play bottom, the worst outcomes -1, I play centre, the worst outcome is 0, and we want to pick, and we for the maxi, the idea of maxim in strategy is you choose the strategy that gives you the highest worst outcome. And the highest worst outcome is centre, right, cos zero is better than m is is is preferred for you but it's preferred to you by you than -1. So we'll say the strategy for player one, the maximum strategy for player one is to play centre. And we can do the same argument for player two. We'll do the same ar player 2, then we'll take questions. Who's the ar for player 2, right? If we play left, What's the worst possible outcome we could get as player two, if we play left? We get -2, right? This is the worst possible thing. Whereas if we play middle, then the worst possible thing where we could get 1 or 0 or 1, the worst possible thing is 0, if we play right, the worst possible thing is minus 2. And so, if we're thinking about doing the best worst thing, the best worst thing would be to play middle, because that is. That gives us the best outcomes. Of the worst outcomes. Yeah. Next minimises the west payoff like the West payoff. It maximises the worst payoff. It finds, it looks at all the worst payoffs and picks the strategy that gives you the best possible payoff of the worst payoffs. So that's what we done, and that's exactly what we've done here, right? We've looked at the worst payoffs for player one, the worst possible outcomes that they could get if they play top, centre, or bottom, and we've picked the one that maximises those worst payoffs. Similarly for player two. We, we, we maximise the work, the maxim in strategy here is. Pick the best of the worst outcomes, which in this particular case is player one plays centre, player two plays middle. Other questions, questions, concerns. Issues. OK. I think a useful question then is, actually I shouldn't have done that, get those in there. I think a useful question then is. Damn it, come here. It What do you think players will do? Maximin strategy was player 1, play centre, player 2 plays mid. But we can kind of think, what do we, what do we think people are gonna do here? And if I intuitively think through this game. So if I'm player one and I'm looking at this, I'm going, well I, I can't play top. Cause if I play top, player 2 will play middle, and I'm stuffed. I can't even play bottom, so I play bottom player 2, we'll play middle and I'm and I'm stuffed, um. So cent's probably a good choice, and if I'm player 2. It feels like middle's just the obvious best choice. It's not strictly dominant, but it's kind of weakly dominant over the others. There's no reason not to play middle. I play middle I might win. Or I might draw. If I play left I either draw or lose, I play right I draw or lose. So so for player two, it seems pretty reasonable to say that player two is gonna play middle. and if player two is playing middle, then player one definitely wants to play middle. So I think just sort of thinking through the game at an intuitive kind of level, it seems pretty reasonable to say that we should get kind of the same outcome as the maximin strategy. Right, but these kinds of, these kind of games, the maximum strategy works pretty well for these kinds of zero-sum games. The maximum strategy as a solution concept accords with our intuition of what people kind of should do, right, cos you don't want to leave yourself open to exploitation and the way you do that is by playing Maximin. We're, we're assuming it's it's a hard question to answer. they are going at the same time, but we still wanna, but we can think about what our opponent, we can still think about what our opponent's gonna be doing, and really for the intuition part, like for the maximum strategy definitionally, it's just maximise the, the minimum. For the intuitive here, it really is just what do you think people would actually do here? I think people would play centre middle to this game. Right, because I think player 2 would realise that middle is just the right option for them, and I think player 1 would realise that player 2 would realise that middle is the right option for player 2. And given, yeah, that. Yeah, it's not quite, it's not quite Klevel thinking but it's a similar, similar concept to Klevel thinking. It's just sort of, what would they actually do? I think this is what they would actually do. Um, I think you'd be hard pressed to justify anything other than this, as the thing that these people would actually do. Because if player 1 was playing top, then player 2 would only ever want to be playing right. And if player 2 was playing right, player 1 wouldn't want to play top. So there's no sort of equilibrium type outcome here. Question No. That's a good question. What if they played randomly, which player do you think should play randomly? It's a good question, so like it is a reasonable question, which player do we wanna play randomly first? We wanna think about first, playing randomly. Player one player like. More weirdness, yeah, but yeah, let's look at player one. Suppose player one's playing randomly. If player one's playing randomly, I reckon player two can exploit that. If player one's playing randomly, I reckon player 2 is rubbing their hands in glee because they can, they can play middle, and they can win the game 2/3 of the time. And player 2 is super excited that player one is playing randomly, and the random and therefore randomness was a bad choice because if player 1 was playing randomly, player 2 plays middle and player 2 wins most of the time. If player two's playing randomly, I reckon player 1 is rubbing their hands in glee. Because if player two's playing randomly, player one can go right, I'm gonna play top. Right, 1/3 chance that we break even, 1/3 chance I lose a bit, and a 2/3 chance that I, sorry, a 1/3 chance that I win extra big, right, then I end up in in top right and win extra big, and that's great for me. I, I, I. Win a third of the time, lose a third of the time, when I win, I win by lots. So playing randomly I think is a is a potential choice, which we will talk a lot about, uh we'll talk a lot about mixed strategies this this week. But I think it's a bad choice for these players because it because it's exploitable. And so the better thing really is just to play that maxim in. it's just It's no fun, right, it's a terrible, yeah, yeah, sure. Um And in hidden games, and in games with hidden information and stuff, you have to worry about that and a lot more, a lot more seriously. Otherwise questions about definitional maximine or finding maximine or anything like that. OK. This is where we start, historically, but it's clearly not where we end, right, because when we go to any sort of economic applications, um, and, and this is again, lots of non-economics, lots and lots of political science applications as well, um, lots of our applications are not zero sum, right, for economic applications, any kind of oligopoly competition is gonna be not zero sum. We're gonna talk about um the, the game that is called the Battle of the sexes, which is, it's an old name. But we stick with the old names so that we can talk to, read the old papers and talk to people about these things. Um, prison's dilemmas, which we talked about which we talked about last year. They're all not zero sum, really anything outside of your parlour games are not zero sums, right, when you're going in and you're negotiating with someone, and there's a bit of give and take, and I'll do a little bit here, but you'll do a bit there, it's not a zero-sum game. There is scope for everyone to win. There is scope for everyone to lose. And that's most games have that kind of flavour, most sorry, most strategic interactions have that kind of flavour. Basically all economic, most of your political science ones, it's not a, it's not a winner and a loser, it's, What works best for everyone, I think. And for those kinds of games, Maximin is bad, it's not a good solution concept. Works great for zero-sum games, makes perfect sense. But the logic but as soon as you have a non-zero sum game, the logic breaks down, because the logic of it was, For my, my opponents trying to do best for themselves, the way they do best for themselves is by hurting me, so I'm gonna set myself up to not be able to be hurt. But in a non-zero sum game, that's just silly because your opponent isn't, your opponent's trying to do the best for themselves, but that doesn't mean they're trying to hurt you, that just means trying to do the best for themselves. That might hurt you, that might help you, who knows, depends on circumstance. We can still calculate a maxim in strategy, it's just bad, right, so if we go and we do our maxim in again, right, if player one plays top, the worst possible thing to, so this is a, this is a new game, different payoffs, same actions, different payoffs. This is clearly quite a different game, it's not zero sum. You'll see that some of these cells sum to zero, but some of them sum to positive numbers, and some of them to negative numbers. It's not zero sum, we're not diametrically opposed. Alright, top right means we all lose, bottom right means we all lose. Um, but we can work out a maximum maxim in strategy just to, you know, we can run the algorithm and find it. So if player one plays top, what's the worst outcome they can get? -1, right, they could end up with -1, and that's terrible. They play centre, then they definitely get 0, they play bottom, then they might get -1. And so our maximin strategy says for player one is to play centre. Because that maximises the worst thing that could happen to them. And similarly for player 2, if they play left then the worst thing they could get is -1. They play middle, they're short of 0, they play right, then the worst thing they can get is -1. 0 is the best of these. And so our player 2 plays. Middle It is the maximum strategy here. It is the thing that That falls out of the algorithm, we when we run the algorithm. That's fine. Any questions, problems? With the algorithm and running it and finding a thing here. Lovely. What do we think players should do? If you're a player, and you approach this game, your player, you're player one. And you approach this game, in fact, I'm gonna, I'm gonna see if I can do this. Let's see if we can, let's see if we can do this quickly. Over here, each of you guys will player one. Right? You're gonna have to choose what you want to do as player 1. Over here, each of you guys are player 2. We're we're gonna cut the line just, just there, so the, the blonde haired gentleman is, is on the player one side. You see you guys over here, you're player two. Think for a second about the action you're gonna take and lock it in your mind. Take a moment. Last player ones first, lock it in for a moment. We're all locked in. Player ones, who plays, who plays the maximum, who plays C? One person, one person, who plays B? Thank God no one. Who plays T? Cool, most people play T. Player twos, who plays Maximin M? Who plays, what's the other terrible one, B. And who plays, oh sorry, your, sorry, ah, who plays who plays left? Everyone, cool, right, so the, the natural play here, which, except for one person, everyone did, um, I think natural play here uh is, is top left, right, it's, it's we play, player one plays top and player two plays left because, Everyone wins, and it's clear that everyone can win and so why would you do anything other than this? It's not the maxim in the strategy. It's, it's something else, right, it's a different strategy. Um, and it's the pretty natural one, it's designed to be the natural one but but it is the natural one. And so given this, given that Maximum seems to not work for non-zero sum games, we needed something else. We sat down and needed, we sat down and said we need something else. Um, one option was this this notion as, as we said before, of dominant strategy equilibria. The problem with dominant strategy equilibria is they almost never exist, right, when they do exist, absolutely this is the next page. Yeah. One option is dominated equilibria. When they exist, great, fantastic, do them, obviously, that's what we should that's what we should expect people to do, that's what people should do, we should always see dominant tragedies being played because, If the best thing for you doesn't depend on your what your opponent's doing, do the best thing for you, and your opponent will be the same, will do the same thing and straightforward. And they might exist, but they might not, right, there's no actual dominant strategy here, even though we played, even though basically everyone played top and everyone played left, um, It's not strictly better than playing C, right? T is not strictly better than C. If player two plays right, then C is the better option than top. So there are, like, it is possible, um, so there's no dominant strategy. Um, and so if it doesn't exist, if there's no dominant strategy, then domitrag equilibrium is not gonna be a very good guide to behaviour because it doesn't give us any guide. Um, obviously if there is dormitrag equilibrium, as you said, that's the good one. So we need something else, that's not just this, and the something else is that big breakthrough from the 50s, 50s, which is the Nash equilibria, right, 1950s, a while ago now, but it's our Nash equilibria. Um, we're hoping that it captures our intuition of what an equilibrium is. It's an equilibrium because there's no reason to deviate. It doesn't give us a dynamics that get us to that equilibrium, equilibrium, so, so your level K thinking for example is one way you can talk about dynamics that get towards an equilibrium, um, national equilibrium doesn't speak to that, it really just says, Here's a strategy, is it an equilibrium? Is there an incentive to deviate? Um And so when we go to our thing here, this top left, it's our national equilibrium. We're not saying how we got to top left, but if we were, if we look at top left, if we think about top left as a strategy profile, then there's no reason for anyone to change. Right, because if top change if player one changes they do worse, if player two changes they do worse, and so there's no, there's no positive incentive to deviate. Where are we here? A downside is that there may be many equilibria, we talked about the left and right side of the road, right, which side of the road you drive on is a, is a Nash equal, like, everyone driving on the left is a Nash equilibrium. Everyone driving on the right is also a Nash equilibrium, so there may be many of them. Whether this is, whether you think of this as a flaw in the Nash equilibrium or a feature of the Nash equilibria is kind of a concept as a concept is kind of a debatable point. I think most people would fall on the side of this being a downside. They would really like it if there were if we had some solution concept which said this is the one to choose, um, the fact that we have a solution concept that says, well, here are multiple different best things is kind of, It's kind of tricky, uh, it's kind of unfortunate, um, but you might think of this as a feature, certainly it is a it is a fact that there can be multiple national equilibria. But what's really useful as a guide to behaviour is that it solves the big problem that um the dominant strategy equilibria has. The big problem for dominant strategies was it doesn't exist. Nash equilibria always exists. See footnote, right, always exists. As long as you view things in the right way, um, and, What we're gonna be doing here as different than micro one is viewing things in the right way to make sure that we do uh can actually say that Nash equilibria always exists, because they do, it's just a mixed strategy problem. So we're mostly, we're basically always gonna use Nash equilibria, it is the thing that people use. It's the first thing that people use, then there's refinements. Any questions, questions, problems conceptually here. Let's smash through some common 2 by 2 games. You should be aware, yay, um, but quickly, because this is still, this is kind of hopefully micro one, you should be aware of and know how to find Nash equilibrium of a bunch of different 2 by 2 games, right? Um, you should be able to do the prisoner's dilemma, so let's just draw up a quick thing here, player 1, player 2. Let's just grab this so we can copy it later. Yeah. Um, and so our two players can either, for, for, um, for the prison's dilemma they can either defect, I use the term betray, I think that's. That works better, they can either betray or they cannot betray. So betray their comrade or not betray their comrade. The storyline for prisoner's dilemma is you have two criminals who are caught by the police or whatever and are brought into separate rooms and are told we have enough to get you on this small crime. So we have enough to get you on this crime, but if you give us extra information to to to to extra information about your compatriot, then we'll give you a few years off, right? We've, we've got you for 10 years, but if you help us out, we'll take 2 years off. But if your compatriot helps you out, then we get you for the big crime and you go, you go away for an extra 5 years, right? And you know, so you can, you can take 2 years off yourself, but it'll give them extra 5 and they're gonna have the same thing. Um, is the, is the idea behind behind the prison's dilemma. And so if they both don't betray their compatriot, they both go to jail for 10 years. Alright, player 1 player 1 in the bottom left, player two at the top right, so they both go to jail for 10 years. I'm actually just gonna follow what I was driving before. They both go to jail for 10 years, um, if player one betrays and player 2 doesn't, then player one gets 2 years off and player 2 gets an extra 5 years. If player 2 betrays, they get 2 years off, but player 1 gets an extra 5 years, and if they both betray their compatriot, then they both get those 2 years off, but also both get the extra 5 years. And so this is our payoff, right? And I lied a little bit earlier, I said games with um with dominant strategy equilibria were were really really boring. This game has a dominant strategy equilibrium. But it's not very, very boring for different reasons. Um, because an escape has a dominant tragic dormant trage equilibria, because the best response is always to betray your compatriot, right? Regardless of what your other, the other person does, betraying your compatriot gets you two years off your sentence. So that's the best thing to do. And the other person's sitting there doing the same calculus, right, going there and saying, well if I betray them, I get 2 years off my off my sentence, and that's what I care about. Um, and we can see that, right, if player, if player two is betraying, then player one can get minus 13 years in prison or 15 years in prison, and they'd prefer 13 years in prison. If player 2 doesn't betray, player one can get 8 years in prison or 10 years in prison, and they prefer to get 8 years in prison. And player one's the same, oh sorry, player two's the same. If player one betrays, player two gets change colour. If player one betrays, player 2 gets 13 years or 15 years in prison, they'd preferred 13 years. If player one doesn't betray, then player two can get 8 years or 10 years, and they prefer 8 years. And we see that the Nash equilibria is. For both people to betray, is betray betray. Defect is the usual time that's used. Is betray betrayed because that's that, it's also a dominant strategy because as I said before, it's always the best thing to do, uh, betraying is always best regardless of what your opponent does, or the other player does, um, the reason why this is interesting, Is that the Nash equilibrium, which is what we would expect people to be doing, is not Pareto optimum, it's not a Pareto, it's not Pareto efficient. Um, because it would be better for both of them if they both didn't betray and just go to jail for 10 years. But because of the way that the individual incentives work, both of them would want to betray if that's better for them individually and they end up both being worse off. This is pretty common in models of oligopoly, for example. Models of oligopoly follow a similar kind of structure, right, but it would be best for both firms if they charge half, if they, if they sell half the monopoly quantity. But I can then do a bit better by by selling a bit more than half Monopoly quantity, right, you get the same kind of flavour of things happening. Um And so yeah, this is our national equilibrium for prison's dilemma. Any questions? Questions, problems? I think we're just gonna work through these and then we might finish up. Um, unique Nash equilibrium, it's just one, and it is not Pareto optimal, which is the, the thing about it. We can talk about our battle of the sexes game, horrible name, because it's a really, because these things are all named in the 50s, but. We work with what we've got, um. Rather I shouldn't say it like that, we choose to continue using the same gaming conventions so that we can compare it to the, so that we can still, you know, for for continuity purposes, and so that when we talk to people who know about game theory, we're using the same terminology, um, so it's, this is just, this is just the terminology that is used, even if it is. Somewhat antiquated, um, we talk about going to the ballet or going to the boxing because we're gonna be really, really, Um, Consistent with the original literature. Um, Player 1, player 2, we want to go together. But we also want to go to our preferred option. And our main thing is going together, but we'd rather go together to our preferred option than than not. Right, player one is the kind of player who kind of prefers the ballet, player two is the kind of player who is the partner who really prefers the boxing. Um, they really want to go to the same thing, right, they'd like player two would rather go to the, would rather go to the ballet with player one than go to the boxing without player one. But they'd rather go to the boxing with player one than go to the ballet with player one, right, you really wanna go to your thing, but you wanna go with your partner. Um, so the way we structure this is you get, we'll just do, do this as though you get 2, plus 2 oodles for going to your preferred activity, and plus 3 for going to an activity with your partner. Um, so if they both go to the ballet, player one is super ecstatic, right, because they get, they get, they're super happy because they're going to their preferred option and also going with their partner. And player two is, is, is pretty content because they're at least going somewhere with their partner, and that's, that's pretty good. If we think about player 1 going to the ballet and player 2 going to the boxing, well player one, they're going to the ballet, which they like, but they're not going, but they're going alone, which they don't particularly like, um, so we give that 2 usuals, right, you get 2 usuals for going into your preferred outcome and an additional 3 for going with your partner. And similarly, player 2, player 2's OK with life because they're at least going to the boxing, but they are going alone, which isn't so great. So we get again 2 uses for going to your preferred outcome. If we move down into this one here, this is the worst possible thing, this is player one goes to the boxing and player 2 to the ballet, and they are both hating life because they're both sitting in the activity they don't want by themselves, and it's just awful for everyone. Uh, and finally, we have both of them going to the boxing, again this is phenomenal for player two, kind of OK for pretty still pretty good for player one because they are at least with their preferred partner. Any questions about payoffs here? In terms of Nash equilibria, we can find these things pretty and and then we can talk about best responses and and Nash equilibria. Um, because of the way we set this up, because you get 2 oodles from your preferred option, but 3 oodles from being with your partner, the thing you want to do is be with your partner, and that's that's the main thing driving your driving your choices. Um, and so we think, right, let's put ourselves in the shoes of player one, if player 2 is going to the ballet, I can go to the ballet and get 5, or the boxing and get 0, I want to go to the ballet and get 5. If player 2's going to the boxing, I can go to the boxing and get 2, or I can go, uh sorry, I can go to the ballet and get 2, or the boxing and get 33 is better, so I go to the boxing. Let's put ourselves in the shoes of player 2, if player 1 is going to the ballet, then I can go to the ballet and get 3, or the boxing can get 2, I go to the ballet. If player one's going to the boxing, I can go to the ballet and get 0 or the boxing and get 5, I go to the boxing. And so we have two pure strategy Nash equilibria here. And it's not clear which of these is the thing that actually eventuates, right, there's no, there's, it's a symmetric game, so we don't have, we don't have reasons to think that they both go to the boxing or they both go to the ballet. It's also a really synthetic example, surely what you would do is you would talk to your partner and decide on a place to go. This is the synthetic example that we that we work with, as our battle of the sexist game. So this is simultaneous moves, right, we're acting simultaneously, we just talk about, well, if they both go to ballet, what powers do they get? If they both go to boxing, what powers do they get? What things do not lead to incentives to deviate. It's true, ballet ballet and boxing boxing. Multiple Nash equilibrium, and so predictions become hard. It's also a hidden 3 Nash equilibrium which we will talk about on Friday. Any questions though, questions, concerns, yes. Stay cunt's normally done with end players, not with 2. So the question was about stag hunt, stunts with end players, not with 2. I think if you do a 2 player stag hunt, you end up with the same outcome, yes. To, uh, yes, to natural equilibria, yes. Um, this, this is slightly different in the, there, this is slightly different in the, um, in the mixed strategy Nash equilibrium that exists compared to stag Hut, because I believe this has this has a third mixed strategy Nash equilibrium, the stag hump doesn't. So it's similar but not exactly the same. Uh, the last one which we do want to get through for the last 3 minutes is our matching pennies game. So this is our zero-sum game. This is a, I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna rant about it too much in terms of description, because we are low on time. Um, this is heads or tails, heads or tails, player one wants to match. Uh, and doesn't want to not match. Player 2 wants to not match. Sorry, wants to not match and doesn't want to match. So it's a strict Zero-sum game. But one player trying to match the opponent's action, one player trying not match the opponent's action. And if we do our best responses and we do all the the process we've just been doing for finding Nash equilibria and finding best responses, we end up circling all of these, and we see that there's no Nash equilibrium, there's no strategy profile where both players are playing the best response, best response, um, and so here it looks like there's no Nash equilibria. Um Which is annoying because we said, yeah, we've got 2 minutes, because we said it always exists. Ah, what's happened, um, what's happened is that, In order to have that guarantee that a national exists, we need to extend our strategy space to allow for mixed strategies, right, where players can randomise over their actions, and, and hopefully this is reason this makes sense if we go to our matching pennies game. It's kind of a silly game, if I'm trying to match what you're doing and you're trying to not match what I'm doing. If you're always playing anything, then I can exploit that, right, if you're always playing heads then I'm always, I'm trying to not match you, then I'm always gonna play tails and I'm always gonna win, right? So clearly the best thing for you to do is to randomise. If I have no idea what you're gonna do, if you're equally likely to choose heads and tails, then I can't pick something that wins most of the time for me, and so I'm gonna have to just, and so whatever I choose is gonna be just as good. Um In particular, I, I can't exploit that to win most of the time. And so there's gonna be this notion which we'll talk about on Friday of mixed strategy of mixed strategy of mixed strategies first of all, and then mixed strategy equilibria, which is we don't just pick an action, we pick a probability of choosing each action. So maybe that that might be choose heads with probability of half and tails probably a half. It might be something different than that, it might be heads with 2/3 chance and a 1/3 chance of choosing tails, right, we can, doesn't just mean complete randomise, equal likelihood randomised, we potentially wanna.
