SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Oh 6 Well it's not Alright, right. Welcome back, everyone, sorry for the slight of Jesus. Welcome back everyone. Sorry for the slight delay, and for what's going on with the microphones. Which I can't change apparently. Why isn't there a microphone option? There usually is. Um, anyway, Am I mind-numbingly too loud? It sounds from here like I'm extremely loud, or is it fine? It's fine, alright, cool, we'll just press on then. Alright, so welcome back everyone. uh, we're continuing our discussion from Tuesday, from yesterday, or we're finishing up our discussion from yesterday about production, production and costs. Um, so last time we sort of, we, we built our capital labour model for production. Very, very similar to our consumption model for for consumption, right, consumption, we talked about two goods, you consume the two goods and you get utility. Here you take in two inputs and you produce widgets, pretty much the same. Today is where we start to get that divergence happening between those two, and there were some differences, right, there were a little bit of differences in the, in the utility case, in the consumer case. Consumers had a budget that they had to follow, and they were trying to get on the highest utility they could possibly get, subject to being on that budget, whereas in the firm case we tend to think of the firm having a target production level. So being on an isoquant, one of these 5 isoquants here, um, is their target production level, and they choose the input mix that minimises costs. Um, so rather than maximising it, you minimise it, but it's pretty similar, right, there's a lot of overlap there and, and the outcomes you get in terms of things like these kinds of optimality conditions are ultimately the same. But, and so that was what we kind of did last time. Today is where we're gonna see that a bit of that divergence happening between what we talked about last time, uh between our, our consumption model, our individual model, and our more general, and and our sorry, and our production model. That's, that's today, um, in terms of admin stuff, the sample solutions for the mid-semester exam, including the answers and descriptions for the multiple choice questions, have just gone up on wattle, so after class have a quick look over those if you want to see what. Really good student answers look like for the short answer and what the correct answers were looking for for the multiple choice were and and why as well. In most cases why, one of the questions I basically just say go and read the practise exam cos it was a practise exam question. Um, other than that, it's actually one other admin thing, any other admin things that I should cover now?

SPEAKER 2
There are some, yep. Uh, multiple choice is.

SPEAKER 1
Let's do it now. So the question was about multiple choice in the final exam. So we have options of having multiple choice of again about a quarter to 50%, similar amounts, or not having multiple choice. Who would like multiple choice in the final exam? Everyone, cool, done. Um, so the final exam will have multiple choice of about 20 to 25%. Um, we do a similar thing for cheat sheet in the final exam. Who would like a cheat sheet in the final exam? Everyone, cool, done. Um, so we'll have a cheat sheet for the final exam, same deal, handwritten on a physical with a physical pen on a physical piece of paper, double sided, handwritten a full page. Um, in terms of that exam, there are a couple of things I can talk about there. I'll talk about them in one second. Um, the thing I want to mention is exam viewing and requests for remarking and that kind of stuff. Uh, exam viewing will happen next week and the week after. If you Google RSE ANU RSE exam viewing, it'll take you to our exam viewing page, which will give you instructions on when the exam viewing is and how you, how you do that. Um, if you want to view your exam, please go through that process. If you think a question's been marked wrongly, you should go through that process first, and at that place at that process, they'll have a form you can fill out, um, so it's a written form, it's a specific form that we use, um, that you fill in and say, I would like question 3 remarked because I, my mark, my answer exactly mirrored the the example one and I got 6 out of 9 instead of 9 out of 9, or whatever. Why you think we were wrong in the way that we why we, why you think the marking was erroneous, right, briefly, uh, you can in principle fill those in without going to exam viewing, but it's really hard to make a good argument for why you think your answer is right if you haven't looked over your answer. Um, so, so my experience is people who look over their answers and then submit these forms tend, well, yeah. People who don't look at their exam first tend to just have no change. Um, people who look over their exam first and then submit these forms fall into the standard-ish breakdown comes out to about 60% of people see their mark go up, sorry, 60% see their mark not change at all, 30% see their mark go up by a little bit, 10% see the mark go down by a little bit. Tends to be the breakdown. Um, so mark going down is a possibility from a remark request, and it does happen sometimes. Um Yeah, so exam viewing, exam review, that's the sort of the process we use for that. Um, any questions on exam viewing or exam review? Lovely, uh, final exam, the final exam, uh, a couple of things on it, so we just talked about it briefly, so I'll just say a few other things on it, um, It's a 3 hour written exam plus some reading time, so it's a slightly longer exam in the mid-semester. The mid-semester ultimately I think was a pretty OK for length, um, maybe a smidge long but pretty OK for length. Um, so I would be expecting the final exam to be about to be about 50% longer, be 40% longer, right, because you have an extra hour to do it. Um In terms of the content, in terms of the style of questions, very similar, right, much the same style of questions, a mix of some conceptual stuff, a little bit of calculation stuff, um, some definitional stuff, right, the same sort of mixes in the in the mid-semester, um, the content being covered is the entire course, right, so the entire course is accessible. Um, that also means that you might in principle be assessed, well you would, sorry, you will in principle, or you will be assessed on combinations of units, so you should expect to have things like questions like, how does the consumer theory side of the course. Differ and how is it similar to the production theory side of the course, right, as a, as broad examples, right, or how could we use the stuff that we learn in the game theory to apply to the monopoly side of monopoly stuff that we do in a couple of weeks, or the externality stuff in a couple weeks, so you should expect to see some of the questions at least drawing from different parts and asking you to to link them. Um And yeah, cause it covers the whole course, content, yeah, any question, oh, and the draught, I'm not writing this down for a reason, because the draught timetable for the exam has been released. The draught timetable that is subject to change, but typically doesn't change, um has the exam on Thursday of week Thursday morning of week 13. So that's. Don't don't, you know, pen it into your diaries, but you can pencil into your diaries Thursday morning of week 13, of what would be week 13 is the exam. That's it, any admin issues otherwise. We're all good. Cool, content. So costinization in the long run, so we have our firm, our firm has some some sort of production function, some sort of cobb Douglassy, not quite, but Cobb Douglas-ish production function as we see here, um, with some isoquant Q equals 1234 and 5. I'm sorry for the low quality, I couldn't get the, the, there was a technical issue, so I'm using the document camera, so I can do this. Um, and so we want to think about if the firm wants to produce some level of output, what level of input should they use, well, they're gonna look for that point where the ISO cost and the ISO quant are just touching, right, are, are, are tangent. And so if we want to produce Q equals 1, and we have, if we have some Io, yeah, some Io costs here which I will get rid of, if we have some Io cost function here where these are all points with the same cost, we're obviously not gonna produce Q equals one with this much capital and labour cos we can do it more cheaply. We can do it more cheaply by producing, With this much capital and labour, and we can't do it any cheaper than that, so that's gonna be the amount we choose to produce. So Keeping things nice and straightforward. We get some costs. Yeah. We get some costs of different production level of different, it's up here somewhere, it's interesting. Don't really want that to be all the way up there. And so we get the different points that we would choose to produce and we get the expansion path. For this firm, if we wanted to include an expansion path. We sort of say what types of inputs this firm uses, and they have this sort of weird shape for this expansion path because that's how we happen to draw what this that's right, what this firm's production function happened to end up looking like. Obviously as costs of inputs change, so if wages change and your interest rate changes, you get different expansion path, but if wages go up, you use less labour, rate of capital goes up, you lose less useless capital as you would expect, all the things you would expect to have happen. And so if you want to produce Q equals 3, then you should use, These inputs here. Questions, problems from last time. Lovely. From this. We can talk about costs, we did mention this last time, but I want to go over it again because we did it kind of quickly last time. From this, we can translate all of our work, Into a quantity. Cost world. Right, because we can look at this and we can say, well if we want to produce 12. 34 or 5 units. How much is it gonna cost us to do that? Well, to produce one unit, to produce Q equals 1, we want to be on, we're gonna be on this iso isoquant. The cheapest way to do that is to produce exactly here, which means we're on this IO cost line here, and that iso costs line uh is C equals 2, C equals 4. 56. 9 Like different costs of production, so the cost of producing one unit, Was 2, crossing 2 units is 4. Three units was 56. 9, so we get this sort of. Shape to our. Cost function. The point being, our cost function here is derived from. Our product is derived from our production function and from our maximisation behaviour, our our cost sorry, our cost minimization behaviour. And we get cost of producing Q. Questions, problems, concerns. Fantastic. From this we can talk about things like the marginal cost of production, right, so we can go to our graph here and we can say well what is, What does the marginal cost of production look like? Right, we care about marginal cost, average costs, we talked last time about this interrelation here. We're gonna build these, we'll build them as we build, we build, we'll build short-run costs at the same time, um, so it'll be, it'll be clearer. Uh, and we got this really, really nice result that says the. If QStar minimises average cost, then the marginal costs and the average cost are equal. It's important for our stuff on perfect competition next week. Just to recap, any questions, problems? Lovely. The diff the difference, all of this work that we've done so far is really long run work, right, we're assuming that we can choose capital and also choose labour, and while that might be the case, it certainly is the case in the long run, it's often the case that firms can't change all of their inputs to production, right, we tend to have this idea of there's a short run where we can change some things but not everything, and then our long run we can change everything. Um, to keep things again easy for ourselves, we're gonna assume, because we only have two types of goods, we're gonna call labour the one that you can change quickly, and we're gonna call capital the one that you can't change quickly. So when the short run, capital is fixed. Now for different firms, right, what counts as short run or sorry, um, do I have this here, um, for our modelling, labour changes in the short run, both changes in the long run. That might depend on the firm, and the type of firm. If you talk about something like say a university, labour increases at least are really hard to do in the short run, you can't just quickly hire a bunch of new, Lecturers, it takes time, um. Takes a long time to to hire a bunch of new lecturers and build a department, um, building a building is like it's still a long process, but it's a somewhat quicker process. So for something like a university, you might have all of this be a bit weird, and the short run be 5 years that it takes to build a building, and the long run be the 20 years it takes to build a functioning department. Right, um, whereas if you're a lot of different types of if you're a McDonald's franchise, right, then the short run where you're hiring workers and choosing how much labour to hire might take, might be a might be a week on week basis, and the long run would be opening a new shop, which is a refit of the existing building, which takes 2 months. Right, so that what talks about long run and short run can be very different. Which input is short run is the one that can change in the short run, could differ by firm. Obviously in a more complicated analysis, your firm might have, you know, 7 different inputs and 3 of them are short run and 4 of them are long run. We're just keeping ourselves easy with 2 inputs, the short run input which we which we're making labour, the long run input which we're making capital. Questions, concerns. Fantastic. So the issue is in the short run, the cost of production is, first of all, total cost of production will almost always be higher in the short run, in the short run our capital level's fixed, we can't change it, and so we can hopefully, if we're very lucky, and this lets me, Click the screen which you should. Good. Right, we had before I've lost these now. We had before these nice iso costs. Gave us the cheapest way to make these goods. Didn't like that one. Suppose our capital level is fixed. Kor Right, in the long run we choose to produce at the at the at the tangent points, right, that's that's our, that's our optimal level. But in the short run we can't change capital, and we have changed, we're stuck with that, we, we don't have a choice. We can't increase it, we can't decrease it. The argument we want to make is that our cost of production, regardless of whether we have too much capital or not enough capital compared to what we want, our costs of production are gonna be higher. Unless we have, you know, just the right amount of capital, which we will have on one point, our costs of production are going to be higher in the short run, because if we're stuck with this much capital. Right. If we then want to produce K0 units, sorry, Q1, Q1 units I should say, if we want to produce Q1, Q equals 1, so 1 unit. Ideally we'd love to be here, but we can't be, right, because we have too much capital, we're stuck with that. And we're still having to pay for it, right, we still have to pay the rental price of capital, so we're producing inefficiently because the only way to produce one unit with this much capital is to have really very little labour. Right, is to produce up here somewhere with very, very, very little labour. But of course that up went up there with very, very little labour. That's on a higher isocost line, oh, that's not a very good line, that's on a higher isocost line. That's on cost equals 3, rather than cost equals 2. So it's more expensive because we have too much capital. The contrast to that, of course, if you want to produce Q equals 5, well given that we're stuck with K0 capital, and we want to produce 5 units, the only option available to us is to produce way out here. Right, is to have way more labour than we would really like to, we wanna be, we wanna live up here. And up here but we're stuck because we don't have that much, don't have enough capital, so we have to have heaps of extra labour and that's not as efficient as having less capital, sorry less labour and more capital, and obviously this is also again on a higher ISO cost line. Um, and so unless we're right on that lovely spot just here where we actually have, we want to produce 3 units, and if we got to choose capital we would have chosen Kor, then obviously then everything does work out and we have the same costs, but typically the costs are higher, costs are basically always higher. If we were to go to our, our, Quantity dollar world, what we had before, in fact I will just, Steal it from before. Because it is the same. Oh, This is really our long run costs. In our short run costs are higher, right, they're always higher, they're almost always higher, so to produce one unit, Was more expensive, right, we're on a higher ISO cost, to produce 2 units is more expensive, we're on a very slightly higher Io costs, 3 units was the same cost, so we would have chosen K0 if we could choose capital anyway. 4 units is more expensive because we're undercapitalized, 5 is more expensive because we're very undercapitalized, and so we get this sort of idea of, well, Our short-run costs, they're higher than our long run, except, Right at that optimum, where they're equal. And then they're higher again. Costs in the short run to produce Q. Given that capital Is fixed at that level. Special run costs are typically higher, higher except at that one particular point. Questions, concerns? Now, you, you guys have been doing economics for a while now, you know that we don't care about costs, what we care about are marginal costs. We care about marginal stuff, right, generally speaking, that helps make out that that's what's important for our decision making. And so we want to be able to compare not the cost in the long run to the cost in the short run, but the marginal cost in the long run with the marginal cost in the short run. And that's why we have our big, that's why we have our nice graph here, because it lets us do that. Um, let's still go to a new page, but I will take this with me. Unfortunately, I do want to go below this, I'm not sure how that'll work. Perfect. Now we're gonna be in quantity, we're talking about marginal costs, so it's dollars per unit. about marginal costs, marginal costs are measured in dollars per unit, not in dollars. We then want to say, what happens at. Quantity 1234 and 5. And we're comparing our short-run marginal costs to our long-run marginal costs, marginal costs recall are the slope of the cost curves, right, the marginal cost is the rate of change of costs, rate of change is just the slope of the curve. So what we're looking for here is the slopes of these curves. Um, if we go and we look at our long run cost curve, a long-run cost curve is pretty steep. Which slightly wrong, but that's OK, pretty steep, then it flattens out, and then it gets steeper again. It's pretty steep, and then it flattens off, and then it gets steep. Marginal cost. In the long run. I'm gonna Yeah, it'll be fine. I'm sure it'll be fine. What about short-run costs then? So the important thing here is that while our, well, the interesting thing, I guess the interesting thing here is that if we think about below that level where they where they intersect, they first of all, the slope of short run and long run costs are the same at Q equals 3. Right at that point they Q equals 3 where they where they're just touching, they're also, you know, tangent because they're just touching, um, which means they're gonna have the same slope, which means at 3. Our marginal costs are gonna be the same. The short-run marginal cost is the same as the long-run marginal cost. Because the costs are tangible, it seems like. What's then a little bit strange and a little bit tricky to work, a little bit tricky to sort of to to get mentally right, is if we're in that world below 3, the short run costs are higher, but if we look at these and we compare the slope of our cost curve here with of our short-run cost curve and the slope of our long-run cost curve, our short-run cost curve is flatter. Right, it's a little bit flat, not a lot flatter, but it's a bit flatter, it starts higher, the gap between gets smaller, the way the gap between gets smaller means that the short run cost curve is flatter. So the short-run cost curve is flatter, which means the marginal cost is lower. And so the marginal cost for our short run is going to be Some smaller amount, the cost is higher, but the marginal cost is lower. Similarly, if we look at Q equals, you know, 4 and 5, way up here. Our long-run cost is quite steep, but our short-run cost is even steeper. And so our short run marginal cost is even higher than our long-run marginal cost. And so we're gonna have something. Up here somewhere. Because our short-run marginal cost exceeds our long-run marginal cost, and so we get this sort of slightly odd looking, behaviour like this. Marginal cost. Short run, the short run marginal cost is always, which which looks a bit strange, but one way that we can interpret this is that the short-run marginal cost is always steeper than the long-run marginal cost. Sometimes it's lower, but it changes, it always changes faster. Which is what we have written up here. Short run marginal cost is steeper than the long-run marginal cost, that's kind of obvious when they're upward sloping, when they're downward sloping, it's steeper in the sense of the derivative is larger. Um, Taking into account the negatives. So we get our short run marginal cost versus long-run marginal, versus long-run marginal cost. And that's, and they intersect at that level. At that same level there, the same level as they intersected previously. Questions, questions, problems, yes. Why is it flatter? I guess there's a coup there's there's a the the the quick way of answering this is. So if we go back to our, our, our point here. Are we happy that the short run. Are we happy that the cost curve, sorry, short cost is higher at Q equals 1 than the long-run cost, yeah, and it's high and it's higher but only a little bit higher at Q equals 2, and it's the same at Q equals 3. Yeah, right, so if one curve is, if the if cost in the long run is increasing. And then costs in the short run start higher and they eventually meet. The only way that's possible is if the short run one's flatter, if they were, if it was steeper they would never meet, and if they were the samelo they would never meet, and so, Since they meet, we can determine that the short run cost is flatter, which means lower marginal cost.

SPEAKER 2
I think this test more decent. Uh, assumption, but Yeah, so in the long run we

SPEAKER 1
assume our isoons are staying the same, yes. Um, so sometimes, especially in like a macro kind of world, you might talk about the very long run, um, where you allow the isoquaants to change because you allow technical technical change to occur, so that capital A term changes in your production function, um, yeah, we don't, we're not having that happen. Within the model, right, the firms can't magically decide to become just better, right, they're restricted by their by their production function. But it's a good point because, again, I've read a lot of exam papers and they're like, the way the firm should improve its should improve its profit is by being more productive, you're like, If they could do that, they would have already done that, um, so yes, the firm can't arbitrarily make itself just better. Yes. I She's There is a weird discontinuity at at sort of, I mean think of these as thousands of units rather than 1, and there is gonna be a weird discontinuity from 0 units to 1 unit. We tend to ignore that discontinuity at 0 to 1, yeah. Cause yeah, weird things happen at the 0 to 1 level when you talk about these things, so we just push that problem aside, and I think not unreasonably because we're not talking about opening and closing, we're talking about a level of production. No, it's a good question. And does that address your, that answers your question for? Excellent, good. So we get our cost curves, our short run cost curve, our long run, sorry, short on marginal costs, long run marginal costs, which have these kinds of shapes. We can also talk about average cost curves, right, and average cost curves don't quite look the same. Why can't I select things? Oops. Why did that happen? Why OK, alright, I'm just gonna get rid of all that. I'll try again. Sorry for putting it down here, it's because I do want to have that that verticalness, I think is is handy, um, which the slides don't do very well. We do the same thing with average costs, and again average costs are worked out in the dollars per unit sense because we take dollars and then we divide by number of units. When we're at when we're thinking about our average costs, if we look at our costs in the long run, our average costs seem to have this sort of vaguely nice U shape to them. Things have been kind of chosen to make sure that that happened, um, I really didn't want that at 3 though, I want that minimum somewhere else. Average cost in the long run, um. And because of the shape of this thing, this is because of the shape I've chosen, this is gonna have a sort of vaguely this shape for the average cost in the long run, uh, the important thing that we're interested in is how this change how this compares to average cost in the short run, and our short run average cost, Is just higher, right, there's no nice things that happen here, it's just higher, right, when we look at Q equals 1, the short-run cost is higher than long run cost, and so the short run cost divided by 1 is higher than the long run cost divided by 1 by quantity. If we look at quantity equals 2, short-run cost is higher than the long run, so a short run over 2 is higher than long run over 2, and that's gonna be the case everywhere except at Q equals 3, where the short run long run costs are the same, in which case the average costs are also the same. So obviously there's that special point there at the point where, where we would have chosen that Kor anyway, and so we get, This kind of behaviour for again short run average costs. Intersecting somewhere. But that's all we get, so we can sort of know. Questions, concerns? Issuances. Lovely. Now there is a nice thing that we can do, right, we can talk about our sort of, if we're in a nice moment where it's important to analyse the unique situation, which is our which is our level of when we talk about cu being the level which minimises long run average costs, uh, cos it's gonna come up for us later. So we're gonna call this level that minimises long run average cost. We're gonna call that Q star. Right, if we do that, right, we want to produce 4ish units, or 4, it's easier for ourselves. If we're trying to produce 4 if 4 units is the level that minimises average, um, average cost in the long run, then we're gonna go here and we're gonna say, well, for Q equals 4, the amount of capital we would want to produce, right, if this is Q star, the thing that minimises long run average cost, we're gonna call this level of capital K. Level of capital which we would choose if we got to choose capital, to minimise long run average, long run average cost. OK. Um, because our short run and long run costs look a little nice, look sort of nice when we have this, um, so in particular, just sort of focusing on this. Uh, quantity. Dollars per unit. We're gonna have as usual, our sort of our long run. Sorry, average costs in the long run. Qar But if we have Kar level of capital, then our short-run costs are gonna also, Be tangent, be touching our long run costs. At that minimum point. Excuse me. Average cost in the short run, given that K is exactly Kar, right, given that K is the amount that we wanted. Um, our marginal costs for the short run. I'm gonna go through here. Marginal costs, sorry, our long run marginal costs. I'm gonna go through that that that same point because our marginal costs go through our our where our marginal costs are equal to our average costs, are at the minimum average total cost point, average cost point. This is our marginal cost in the long run, we also want to make we also want our marginal costs in the short run, which should be steeper. But is also gonna go through there. And I am, I apologise because on the, on the other screens, blue and black are really nice and different. And on this screen they're really not. So I encourage you to make sure that you are. Using different colours because I am, I promise, it's just a bit hard to see. It's annoying cos black and blue and black and blue look very similar here, but very different on the wireless connection, black and red look quite different here but very similar on the wireless connection, um, and I've been using the wireless for too long, so. Um But we get all these nice things where everything goes through that nice little minimum point of minimum average total, minimum average cost in the long run. And these are what our cost curves tend to look like for short run and long run for sort of generic cost curves, um, not, these things will not always look exactly like this. In your tutorial, you will do a numerical example for these, it'll be a little bit simpler as a numerical example. So for example, for Cobb Douglas production function, which will be a Cobb Douglas production function, for Cobb-Douglas production functions, because you have constant returns to scale at all scales, um, you have your the average cost in the long run is flat, right? Um, so these things do tweak a little bit because of that fact of average cost being flat in the long run. Um, but all the rest is all the same, you just end up with flat long run average costs. So if you double the size of the firm, you double output, and so the best way, if you want to double your output, the best way to do that is just double capital and labour, which means you're doubling costs, but if you double costs and also double production, then your average costs haven't changed. So you get flat average cost in the long run for Cobb Douglas. Which you will see in Tuts next week. Questions, questions, problems, yes. why For the cost Right, um, because it's it's because it's total cost over quantity, um, so when we talk about, so the, the thing up here is the units in which average cost is measured, and so, so cost, Cost, which is WL plus RK, right? The weight, the thing we measure this in is dollars. Right, um, average cost is cost divided by, amount produced And so we measure this in dollars. Divided by number of units produced. To dollars per unit. In a similar way as marginal cost, though this is slightly less obvious, we measure change in cost over change in quantity, change in costs in dollars, change in quantity measured in number of units, and so this is also measured in. Dollars per unit. So it's a matter of what the, it's a matter of the units in which things are measured, unit here means unit of production. So number of dollars per, I might, you might say dollars per widget. Ah Dollars per widget If that's preferred. Right, dollars per unit of production, whatever that is. Lovely. What questions? No. Just thinking. OK. Of course there's a lot of stuff here. There's the question of why do we care? And obviously it's not no reason, we do care for some reason, um, and the reason is that all of these properties are gonna be really are are ultimately very, very important. That's where the other mic is, are ultimately very, very important when we are when we start talking about perfect competition. Right, because we want to be able to say things like in the long run firms maximising, uh, and sorry, especially in the long run how firms profit maximising in the long run, those results that say average cost at QStar is equal to marginal costs at QStar, which we just sort of went through, really is the result that says government intervention doesn't help in perfectly competitive markets, again, perfectly competitive markets are a, Vanishingly small subset of all markets, but government government invention doesn't work if you have a perfectly competitive market. Again, there are no perfectly competitive markets, but if you had one, government intervention couldn't help, right, because your perfectly competitive market pushes production so that each firm is producing, QStar. Which means it's producing at the lowest possible level of, Average cost already, right, and there's no way to do that, because, so, so yeah, so it's because, um, marginal cost is equal to average cost, there's no way to reduce, there's no way, there's no slack in the system, right, there's no way the government could intervene to have firms sell for a little bit cheaper or produce a little bit more a bit more efficiently or there's no slack anywhere in the system that you're already optimising everything right at the social level, um, because of all this. Because of all these arguments, right, because firms are driven out if they're not profitable, um, because our firms are already producing at minimum average total cost in the long run. Um, so yes, we care about these things because of what they say about perfect competition. Which we will do next week. There's more for today. Any questions, questions, problems? Issues here. Alright, lovely. We can do a little bit of stuff here, um, so we do our case and study, right, we do our comparative statics issue. So suppose our firm is sitting there making some profit, uh, and sitting ha, happily making a bit of profit in the long run, and then demand films. And so our question is, what do we think our firm is going to do when they see this demand form? And so our issue, so I guess first off, we want to have a bit of intuition. Right, demand falls for our product, we can't sell as much anymore. What are we gonna do in the short run? Yeah, but I mean we're gonna certainly we're gonna reduce production, right, we're gonna reduce production because we, we, we can't sell as much as we used to. So I guess how would we go about producing production? What what are we gonna change in terms of our choices? The short, easy answer. Yeah, we fire some workers, right, we don't need as much production, we don't need as much labour, our capital is stuck with what it is, so we get rid of some workers. It's our short one option. Then our, but then we're sort of in a certain sense we are overcapitalized, we have, we have additional capital that we don't really want anymore, that's why it's called overcapitalization up here. And so in the long run what we wanna do is we want to offload some of that some of that excess capital. right so in the long run we'd kind of be expecting ourselves to see, we'd kind of be expecting the firm to reduce its level of capital, hire a few workers back on to replace some of that capital they've got rid of, and end up being a smaller firm that has a bit less capital and a bit less labour. This is kind of what we would expect to see happen. Probably downsize their capital stock, ultimately, so let's actually see this going on. So we can see it going on in a couple of different settings. One setting we're gonna see this is in our labour capital world. And so Our firm was sitting here going, we're producing 12 units of the good. This is pre pre-shock. Pre-shock, we want to produce 12 units of the good, we look at our costs of production and we choose, we realise, based on the relative price of capital and labour. We buy, we have keynote capital. We have Eleanor labour. And our costs are WL 0 plus RK0. And everything's fine, everything's lovely, we're very happy. And then this shock happens, and it's terrible, and our demand demand for our good will change to red and see if red is different enough. Demand for our good falls, and now we only wanna make, 8 units. And to make 8 units, these are our production levels that make 8 units. Does that look different at all? Oh, barely, um. Uh, what else can I try? I'll try green. Just to see, although we do only have a few minutes, so I won't try anything else after this. Hey. Better, it's very clear on my screen here, it's different enough, it's OK. Um, and so our short run effect here is that we, well we can't change our level of capital, we're stuck with it, we're stuck with K0 capital and so in the short run, we're gonna end up we're gonna produce up here at point A, which is to say we fire a bunch of workers. And we don't change our capital stock. And then in the long run, we go, actually we can, we can do a little bit better than this, we're gonna try and try and get back onto our back onto our feet and we'll move to point B. We'll reduce our capital a little bit. We want to, this is K8, we want to produce 8 units. And we'll hire a few workers back, not all of them back, but a few of them back. this is sort of one way of thinking about, thinking about our, our short versus long run effects, because we're a bit short on time, I'll just press on. The other way that we want to be thinking about this, or looking at this problem is in our dollars per unit perspective. And so we were sitting here going, this is all great. We are producing 12 units. We're doing it the best way we can with Q equals 00 sorry, with K equals 0, K equals K0, yeah, we've got time, um. Let's just put a set to optimum initially, cos that'll be easier. Come on. Uh, cost Average cost, long run. Marginal cost Won't run. Yeah, that'll be fine. Then this shock happens and we're stuck with K equals K0 units, right, we're we're we're we're we're restricted to that K equals K0, and so we can't change our capital stock, and so in the short run, We're in our short run world. Average cost short run. Marginal cost short run. OK, who's K? And so to make those to make only 8 units now. It's more expensive. It's not so good. Dollars per unit for average cost is quite high. We're not loving life. But what and indeed our costs are above our long run costs for producing 8 units, our long run average costs of producing 8 units. And so what we're gonna do is we're gonna reduce our capital stock. And by reducing our capital stock is to say selling off capital stock, moving us back down to the optimum level of capital for producing 8 units, getting us back onto that long run average cost curve, and so I need a different colour, so it's gonna have to be red, I do apologise, getting us back down here by selling off some units and getting a new short run, Yeah. Average cost, short run.
