SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice. All right, welcome everyone, sorry for the slight delay there.

SPEAKER 1
There were some minor technical issues that were entirely my fault. Because I had saved the wrong file in the wrong place with the wrong name and it was a pain, but we're good now, and we actually have reduction. So welcome back everyone, how was everyone's break? Everyone refreshed, revitalised, ready for your other exams this week? No. Do you guys have other exams this week, mostly? No, really, some, some yes, some no, fair enough. Either way, um, our exam is obviously done. The first thing we're gonna talk about today is our exam briefly. I'll put this down. It's our exam briefly. Um, mostly you'll be talking about the exam during tutorials, right, so because there was no new content last week for in terms of lecture content last week, uh, this week there's no new content for tutorials, so the so the tutorials will be lecture will be exam revision, exam review, sorry. She'll talk about some of the common issues that came up, some of the review, and a bit of a review of the questions and to talk about how, you know, have a chat about them. Um, I don't know why it says comments on the mid-semester exam there at the top there. Oh yeah, sorry, it's my overview for the day. Um, that's a few things for the mid-semester exam. Um, your grades for that actual exam will go up on, we go up this afternoon, so I'll post them to Wattle this afternoon, you'll see them there. Um, they're not there yet. Exam viewing will be held over the next couple of weeks, and there'll be details released for that as we as we as as it's organised, um. Before you get to that exam result, and part of the reason I'm doing this first and then releasing the results this afternoon, um, is that I wanna sort of establish context for the exam grades because we don't treat, All assessments equally, right, we don't expect all assessments to have about the same grade. We kind of expect the median student to kind of get 15 out of 15 for the tutorial prep, because if you show up, you get, and like you've prepared, then you get the, then you get the full marks, right? So we we've we've baked that into our to our ideas of what we think the course looks like. We've baked in this idea for the project, but we kind of think the median grade's usually about 12 out of 15, right, that's the kind of grade we typically get for these kinds of things. What that means is that you're getting something like 50% on both exams, you're talking about getting a credit for the course, right, because you're getting those higher marks in those other areas. This is kind of how the course is designed, right, the exam is not designed to be as easy to get grades in as the ute prep because you should be getting full marks in the tube prep. So, just to sort of Create a context around this. If there is scaling, cos there's always questions about scaling, so I just address them head on, if there's any scaling, it's done on the course grades at the end of the course. We don't do scaling on an individual piece of assessment. Um, we're not technical in a certain sense we're not allowed to, but in any case, we do it at the end of the course. On individual assessment items. So, uh, with that in mind, we talk about, you know, because people always ask, I don't like to do these things, but I'll put that anywhere anyway. Um, the grades range from about 11% to about 93% on the top end, so we've got people doing very well. About 8% of people getting, get, uh, HD as their raw mark in the exam. They got 54 or higher in the exam. Um, so a good bunch of people are doing very well. Uh, the median was about 1 out, well, the median was exactly 31 out of 60. The average was, I think, a slightly, the, the mean was slightly higher than that, but the median grade was 31 out of 60, um, which again, looking at the whole, the course as a whole and our expectations for other assessment items means that the median student is on track for about a credit, right, which is kind of what we would expect the median student to be on track towards. Um, if you look at the multiple choice versus the short answer, I was expecting the multiple choice to be, Higher, like significantly higher than the than the short answer, it really wasn't, the multiple choice average was 40 54% and the average for the short answer was 53%, so indistinguishable difference between those two things. Um, it was variance within the short answer, right, question one was very good, question four was not so good, um, but, But Multiple choice versus short answer are actually surprisingly similar. Um, as I say, there's a, there's a lot more in terms of the content of the exam, there's a lot more that will be said in your tutorials, but I don't have any questions on any of this sort of stuff that I've talked about just now. The mid regarding the next semester exam. There's there's our question that I keep getting asked. What can I ask it? Cool. The question I've been asked a couple of times now is when we talk about the final exam, does the final exam cover material from before the break? And the answer is yes, right, the final exam covers material from both before the break, and also, After the break, uh, in no small part because it's a, like, you've done, you've done micro 1, you've done macro 1, these courses build on each other, right, on, on, on themselves, sorry. Right? So the stuff we do about consumer theory in the first half feeds into the work we're gonna do in a couple of weeks, in I think 2 weeks on, on market structure. And so you obviously you need that earlier stuff to be able to talk about the later stuff. So it is a test. Yeah. I have to double check, but I believe we will cover new content right to the end of week 12. OK. Otherwise, any questions, problems? We might do like A bit of content in week 12 and then a bit of review in week 12, essentially, I'll have to look at how we're, how we're faring. Yeah. Yeah. You know, we're we're, we're fine in terms of being on track, I wouldn't be at all worried. OK. In that case, Or we do talk about today? Um, because today we really do move into the next stage of the course, right, so week 1 to 4 was was really consumer theory, right? Week one was your baseline work of how two good models work, week 2 was consumer theory in two good models, uh, sorry, week 2 was consumer theory in two good models, week 3 was. Uncertainty in two good models, week 4 was choice over time with two good models. We 5 was something completely different and some game theory, and then week 6 was our exam. Today we go in and we talk about, we, we, we're done with consumer theory. We know how consumers work, fantastic. The other side of our market is, of course, producers, and so we want to know how producers work and what they, how, how they're making choices. Uh, what's gonna be really nice for us is that a lot of the concepts, really nice for us if we were on top of the work previously, is that a lot of the concepts are gonna transfer across really nicely. Um, so we're gonna see a lot of similarities between what we're doing today and what we do, and what we, what we've done already. Um, so we're talking about production functions, marginal product in terms of scales, we're gonna use our too good model again to talk about isoquants and marginal rates of various things, input substitutions, and time permitting, we'll talk a bit about costs as well, which I think which I suspect we will have time or I expect we will have time for. OK. So again, we're talking about firms. What do firms do? We've done micro one. What do firms do, firms make stuff because they want to make money. Firms don't like making stuff, firms like making profit. But to get profit they have to make stuff to sell, and so the making stuff to sell is the the making stuff is sort of a a core component of what they're doing. Um, And so, What the the first thing that we want to talk about is how they make stuff. As always with all of our work, we simplify as much as we possibly can, and we're gonna simplify how firms make stuff as a production function, right, quantity produced as a function of some sort of collection of inputs. This is a huge simplification. It tells it says the firms are only making one good or one type of good, um, which is typically untrue but fine for our purposes. Uh, so we take, we have our collection of inputs and it it it gets rid of all assumptions about intermediate goods and all that kind of stuff. We're all just gonna push that all to one side, and we're gonna have firms take inputs from over here and produce output with them, and outputs just widgets or whatever. Uh, as it says here, in reality, this is extremely complex, right, when you're talking about baking bread, it's a function of lots of different inputs, flour, water, yeast, oil, time, temperature, ovens, bakers. There's a whole bunch of inputs that goes into making this, how much bread our firm, our bakery firm is able to make. But that's all complicated, we don't like complicated things, we like things to be as simple as they possibly can be, and so we talk about two inputs, and our two inputs that we use are capital and labour. These are our two really super broad inputs. labour are the the human hours that go into making stuff. Capital is the machine hours that go into making stuff, and that's everything that there is. If you look at the very early economic texts, like the Adam Smith sort of early early economic texts, they usually use 3 inputs, they talk about capital, labour, and something else as their three major inputs to production. You know what the something else is from how storyical work, yeah. Land, land was the other one that was talked about a lot, um, and that made a lot of sense when 90% of your workforce were agrarian, you know, farmers, and the land really like the land was the thing that mattered the most. Land matters sufficiently like land is still obviously very important, but it's a much smaller component now and so we tend to just treat land as a part of capital, um, and that's fine. Uh, sort of land and things like that are part of capital, there was a push, and you do see these when you do extend these models, there was a push in the 60s and 70s, which is still ongoing, but there was a big push then, um, to include labour and then also on top of labour you include an entirely new component, which, Functionally is quality of labour, which is basically, basically education or human capital level, we normally just throw, we we now for our purposes again to keep things simple, we throw that into labour, so it's one, Man hour of one human hour of a typical worker, right, so a particularly good worker might produce 2 hours of work for 1 hour of time, but we're just gonna ignore all those things, right? Capital which is machines, labour, which is people. Again, for really specialised models, you might you might include other stuff, right, if you were talking about farming, you might include land here, but if you were talking about just generic production typically. Um, and this is really super general form, quantity is a function of capital and labour. Q equals F A L. Any questions? Yes. Yeah. Next slide. So yes, absolutely, um, we can talk about, we, we, we usually talk about diminishing returns to diminishing marginal product is the is the term, right, it's not diminishing returns, that's like, diminishing marginal products, diminishing marginal product of capital and diminishing marginal product of labour. Um, if we think about this from a capital standpoint, right, so we're assuming that extra capital is good, right, that first weird little equation that we have written there, that first weird little equation. Says more capital is good, right, we're running an accounting firm, we have 5 accountants, we have 2 computers, we get a 3rd computer. And that's good, right? We now have a 3rd computer to work with, it improves our production. Things are great. We get a 4th computer reconstruction, we get a 5th computer improved production. We get a 6th computer, it's still good because the derivative with respect to K of production is positive, right, more capital means more production, but it's not as that 6th computer isn't as good as the 5th computer. Right, so positive marginal product. Is this the first part because This thing here. This is the marginal product of capital. Positive capital, more capital is good, but diminishing marginal product, because this thing here is the derivative of capital, derivative of the marginal product. Capital it's the second derivative, so it's the derivative of the derivative, so it's the derivative of the marginal product of capital. And this is negative, which is that more each additional unit of capital is less valuable than the previous. So again, you have your 5 accountants and your 5 computers, and a 6th computer is handy, but it's not that handy. Right, the 7th computer is still good, but it's not as good even as the 6th computer. Like the 11th computer is still slightly good, but it's not really particularly useful. Still slightly positive. Doesn't help, doesn't help very much. You have the exact same thing for labour, right? You have your 5 computers, you have your 5 accountants, you get your 6th accountant, they're handy, but they're not as handy as the 5th accountant was, given that you had 5 computers. Um, so we can talk when we talk about, you know, graphing this, if we, if we think about this from our graphing perspective, this is our normal sort of things of if we have capital. And we have quantity produced. And we have a fixed amount of labour, it's that more capital means more production, but more capital, but the the rate of increase goes down, and so we're getting this kind of shape. 2 F of KL where L is fixed, right, this is lots of labour. At production when we don't have. High labour and low labour, but we don't have much labour. You do the same thing We make all the exact same arguments, virtually no replacements. For labour. Right. This is our production level when we have lots of capital and labour varies. Our production level where we don't have much capital. And labour varies. They have a little bit of capital or a low level of capital and labour varies. So increasing But bending down. Questions, problems. Again, the logic, I hope is fine here, yep. Yep. Yes, probably not with marginal product. But probably with, I hope it's the next one, probably with return, but there is with returns to scale. The, the thing you're thinking of is right, but it's really more to do with the returns to scale. Um, so when we talk about return scales, what you're talking about really is changing all inputs. Um, so this is our idea of we go from. It's not, it's not, we have 5 accountants and we're changing number of computers or 5 computers and changing number of accountants, is what happens if we change both at the same time? Um, so what happens if we double all the inputs, right, if we go from having one computer and one accountant to 2 computers and 2 accountants, is that twice as productive, because there's twice as much of everything? Is it more than twice as productive because there's those sort of, I don't know, gains to scale, as you say, or yeah, increasing returns to scale is the technical term, um. Which from one accountant and one computer to 2 accountants and 2 computers, I think there probably is increasing returns to scale, right, that would make sense, right? Accountant number 1 gets to specialise a little bit into the things that they're good at, account number 2 specialises things that they're good at. You hit a roadblock, you have someone you can chat to, but basically you kinda can just do your own thing and so it's it's a little probably, probably a little bit more than twice as productive. Right, so if you the real world for small, small scale to to as it grows as a firm grows, you probably see increasing returns to scale. But there's, there's there at least potentially a point where that ceases to be the case, where going from 1 to 2 might more than double your production, going from 100 accountants with 100 computers to 200 accountants with 200 computers might not double your production, right, because you've already, no, I don't want to say it like that, um. Because you've already gained all the gains you're gonna get from specialisation, once you have that 100 accountants. And so going from 100 accounts to 200 accountants, you're not getting any specialisation gains, or maybe you're getting very, very little specialisation gains, but you're starting to get a lot of costs in terms of like organisational management and all that kind of stuff, and that's all additional, you know, so, so instead of, you know, 5 of your people are just working on or probably if you have 200 workers, probably 30 of your people, 40, 50 people are just working on making sure everyone else has work to do. Um, rather than actually doing something, um, so you might get some gain specialisation. But also some costs in terms of stuff, and maybe these things cancel out and we talk about constant returns to scale. And so going from 100 accounts with 100 computers to 200 accounts with 200 computers, you double your production, you don't more than double it, but you exactly double your production, and that would be constant returns to scale. But then maybe as you keep growing, the benefits to specialisation get even smaller, the costs to managing all these people get even larger and larger and take up a larger and larger share, and we start to get decreasing returns to scale. You know, you have your 1000 accounts with 1000 computers, and you go to 2000 accounts with 2000 computers, and it's less than double the, and you get less than double the amount of production, um, because you've already got everything you gonna get out of specialisation, but now you're just having to work with more people and, That gets you that sort of S shape in terms of the production as we increase both capital and labour, um, and so you wouldn't normally draw a graph like this. You kind of could If you have capital and labour, and we're increasing both of these, you might get that initially this is really good, we have increasing returns to scale. And then we have constant returns to scale for a bit. And then we have diminishing returns to scale, decreasing returns to scale after that. As we increase both at the same time. Early on, doubling is great, later on doubling, not so great. You can formalise this just fine. But No real, no real burning need to. I'm just worried about how fast we're going through stuff. That's OK. Any questions? otherwise questions. That address that address your query? Lovely. Questions problems? Right, done our basic stuff. We can talk about our too good model, because this is clearly gonna be, there's there's clearly things going on here that make us, hopefully, hopefully, make us think about a too good model, right, because we have an output that is the thing we want. And we have two inputs of the things we're gonna use, which sounds a hell of a lot like consumption, where we have utility being the thing we want and we have two consumption goods which we consume to get it, right, it's, it's pretty much the same thing. There are some differences which we will talk about, but it's pretty similar. Um, so Q is a is a function of capital and labour, and so our question, one of our questions that we might ask is how many inputs are needed to make some specific level of make Q0 widgets, some particular, like 100 widgets, right, what is the level, what is the amount of capital we need, what is the amount of labour we need? And so we're going to use our, our old space again because we, our old too good model kind of system again for the same reason, because we have three things we care about, right, capital, labour, and output. Same same as before where we had apples, bananas and utility. We can't graph it on one, we can't graph it nicely in 3 dimensions because we can't draw a nice 3 dimensional graph, and so we draw a 2 dimensional graph. And so we're gonna draw capital. And labour, so amount of labour, amount of capital, and instead of having indifference curves, indifference curves which are our lines which joined up points which had the same utility, we're gonna have isoquants. And so our isoquants are curves that join the same amount of production, which is helpfully in the name because it's ISO, meaning, The same And quant meaning. Quantity Right, lines which join points of the same quantity. And so, if we're in a normal sort of world where we might think, you know, we're trying to make 100 widgets, maybe we can make that with 10 workers and 30 units of capital, maybe we make that with, 30 workers and 10 units of capital. Maybe we make that with 17 workers and 17 units of capital. Or whatever it is, though. Or whatever it is. Right, so this is our Iouant line for 100 units of production. Because we can make 100 units from any of these units, or any of these inputs, any of these collections of inputs. Questions, problems. Right, if we had this as our production level, if this is one of our isoquants, and we had another Isoquant here, what would be a reasonable amount of production for this isoquant? 120, cool, good, just to emphasise the point, right, there's gonna be lots of isoquants depending on how much production you you're looking for. Alright, 120 80, whatever, 70, whatever, doesn't matter. The bio ones. Exactly the same thing as our indifference goes, exactly the same thing, well. Almost exactly the same thing, they're production, not utility. Sorry, I say I I should be clear, almost, not quite the same thing, in no small part because when we talked about utility, we spent a long time talking about how you couldn't compare utility between different people and it was only ordinal and then you know. Utility of 5 didn't mean anything, it was just that 5 was smaller than 6 and all that kind of stuff, and all of that complication is not remotely relevant when we talk about production, right? It's 100 computers that we make, and 100 computers is 100 of them. It's not, it's not just smaller than 110, it's 100. Um, so the numbers actually, uh, the numbers are, are meaningful, once again, yeah. Well, I don't wanna say more is better than less, more is more than less. Uh, I wouldn't say it's better than less, it's ultimately going to be better than less because what the firm cares about is profit and, well, mm. More is not necessarily gonna be better than less for the firm, right, um, because while the firm wants more stuff, making more stuff costs more money to make, and so the profit max if if we have a more complicated model and we cared about the profit maximising level of production, it's not that more production is better, right, because when you produce you have to pay the costs and so the, the maximisation problem which we will talk about looks a bit different. Um, yeah, so it's not just that more is better. So the, the restrictions are different, right, for consumers it was maximise utility subject to not going over your budget constraint. For firms it's more, it's it's a different problem which we will talk about which is profit maximisation, which is maximise revenue minus costs, and that works a bit differently. Similarly, but a bit differently, yeah. Right, so maybe it doesn't. So the question was what if, what, what, why does it make sense to say you can substitute capital for labour and vice versa? Um, for some things, it might make a lot of sense that you can substitute these things. That, that, again, I'm using my accountants and computers because I think that's an easy one, that if you had 5 accountants with 10 computers, right, each accountant is super productive because they have 2 computers, they can run a programme over here and then they can, while that one's doing stuff they can come and work on this one, Maybe you could have 7 accounts, maybe they would be just as good with 7 accounts and 7 computers. Right, so you have a few more workers but a few less computers, so you make a trade-off between those things. Right, so because then each accountant is less useful, but there's more accountants, and so you make a bit of a trade-off between the amount of workers that you have and the amount of capital that you have them use, um, so this is in this particular example, I hope that makes sense. More generally I think this is pretty reasonable actually, is that, You can have certain lots of, I mean, basically any manufacturing process, you can either have workers do it, you either have a huge amount of workers and put in a lot of hours to make something. Or you can have a lot fewer workers, we have sorry fewer workers and some decent machines, or a lot fewer workers and some really expensive machines, um, and so that's that labour capital trade-off, does that make sense then? Yeah, I can certainly see circumstances where you might think that there isn't an ability to trade these things off. Yeah, so in that, so if you're, if you're trying to make computer chips, or try to build computers, right, I, I guess it's fine, um, you're probably gonna need a certain minimum level of capital to be able to make anything, um. It's just the way I've, the way I've drawn this on this particular occasion, you could have a circumstance where there's a minimum level of capital required to make anything. Absolutely. Um, we're not gonna use that as our as our as our typical example, but you could construct a model where that was the case very easily. OK. Can we hazard a guess on this? What do we reckon is the standard production function that is used in our economic theory, right, FOKL. Is usually, any guesses? Cobb Douglas, yay, right, so it's, it's gonna be K to some power times L to some other power, um, because it's Douglas, because Cobb Douglas has all those nice things that we like, right, it gives us that substituteability between labour and capital, it gives us partial substituteability between labour and capital, so it's not just, you know, each worker is worth one computer, right, if you have lots of workers, then each additional worker is really useless compared to having one extra computer, right? Um, so it gives us that partial substituteability and diminishing marginal rate of technical substitution, which we'll talk about in a second, um, it has all the nice properties that we expect. We're also for, uh, for this purpose, we're going to throw on an extra term that we usually include which is gonna just pop an extra constant out the front, which is our general level of productivity, right, so that's, that's, You know, we wanna, we wanna also within our model be able to say what happens if productivity increases, what happens if we just get better at making stuff with the same number of inputs, and A is gonna do that for us. It's a constant, yeah, it's a constant, it doesn't change unless it's a constant, which means it doesn't change endogenously. Same as alpha and beta, they don't change endogenously, but we could talk, yeah, we could talk about exogenous changes, right, we can go to our model and say what happens if? A increases, if productivity increases. Right, it's called like worse. Uh, alpha and beta are set between 0 and 1, that makes sure that we have positive but diminishing marginal product of capital and and diminishing marginal product of labour. Um, we don't necessarily require alpha plus beta to be exactly one. Right, alpha phosp equals one means if we double capital, if we, if we double all our inputs, then we double all our output, and so alpha pulse beta equals one is the assumption of constant returns to scale, which we may not want to make. Because there's lots of firms where that's not the case. This sort of functional form does preclude the real world possibility that was talked about earlier, right, that S shape in terms of total, in terms of um overall in terms of returns to scale. This does preclude that because alpha plus beta is your level of returns to scale. The alpha plus beta is one, you have cost returns to scale, it's less than one, you have um diminishing returns to scale, greater than one you have increasing returns to scale. Um, so we, we can't change that within our model. Um, Especially in macro, in macro they normally do assume alpha alpha plus beta equals one, because at the macro level it looks like it does in the data, when you talk about aggregate production within an entire society, not within each individual firm, but society-wide, it looks like alpha plus beta is one, and you get really nice interpretations where alpha is the proportion of income that's paid to capital and beta is the proportion of income that's paid to labour, um, but that's a macro thing, not really a micro issue. When you do your full equilibrium analysis and macro, you get really, really nice interpretations. We won't see those here. Any questions, problems? OK. So, as always, we can talk about our indifference curves, I mean our isoquants because they're the same thing, very similar thing. Um, so what are our, what do we expect our ISO ants for our Cobb Douglas production function to look like? Well, we kind of expect them to look nice. Right, um, they're gonna look the same as our indifference curves did for our Cobb Douglas consumption function, our Cobb Douglas utility function, which is that when we have lots and lots of labour, We go back to our form what's here. U equals A times beta the alpha, L to the beta, alpha and beta less than 1, and we have lots and lots of capital. Extra capital's not that useful. Right, so we would need a lot of extra, if we have lots of capital already, we would need a lot of extra capital to get an extra unit of production, or rather we can talk about marginal marginal products and margins substitution. In any case, our Ioquants for our cobb Douglas production function, they're gonna have that nice bode in shape for all the same reasons. For all the same reasons that we talked about in week 1 and week 2, for the indifference curves for a Cobb Douglas utility function. Um, probably bow in a bit more than that. I don't like how bo in that is. I've drawn this more or less symmetrically or pretty close to symmetrically, which is alpha equals beta, um, there's no special reason you would require that. And obviously More capital, more labour. As you move in the northwest direction, sorry, northeast direction, you're talking about more goods. Southwest is less goods. There's lots of these. Hopefully obvious, questions, problems. We want to, because we have to, because we because we, we, we don't want to use this. We talk just as we talked about the marginal rate of substitution for consumption, we talk about for production, we talk about the marginal rate of technical substitution. Exactly the same thing, it's just that we're in the production world now, so we put in this extra word technical in there. It's the amount by which one input can be reduced when one more unit of another output is added, while holding output constant, and so we go to our, Our graphs, because it's been a little while over the break, U equals 10. The amount of which one input can be reduced. And another is added Keat production constant, we're talking about going from X to Y, and so we're talking about our marginal rate of technical substitution, table. this one. I I try technical substitution? Uh This room's not very well set up for. This style of thing, it's a bit higher. Our marginal rate of technical substitution is the change in capital. As we change L Which we of course, What I have as the derivative. Of capital as we change L. Which is derivative. Of quantity, or I should say really. Uh-huh. Uh. What term do I use here later? Let me just make sure I get the, I have a term that I use later, it's a bit annoying. The FDL The FDK Is F is our production function. And so this is our marginal product of labour, marginal product of capital. Hopefully none of which is massively surprising because it's all the stuff we did when we talked about consumer theory. It's just now that we now we talk about it in terms of producer theory. So the slope of our isoquants. These things, remember? Look of our isoquant, the same quantity lines. Is our martying of technical substitution, which is our ratio of marginal products, product of labour with marginal product of capital, for all for the same reasons that we saw in the consumer theory. Questions. Questions, problems. A good time. Just to round us out a little bit, we can talk about types, different types of input substitution, we can talk about perfect input substitution, which is this idea of we can either have a worker or we can have a machine, and we don't care which, right, a worker is just. Uh, you know, one worker is just as good as one machine or one worker is just as good as 2 machines or vice vers whatever it is, there's a fixed ratio in which these things can be inputted. So we can talk about perfect input substitution, and of course that's, that falls within the scope of what we can talk about, labour, capital, and if we talk about iso quants, what will the isoquants look like for our perfect input substitution. Perfect input substitution. Yeah. Yeah, they give me nice straight lines. Can you tell me why? Yeah, the, the margin of technical substitution's fixed, right, the marginal rate of technical substitution is fixed, it's the same level each same level because it's always one worker for one machine or one worker for two machines, and so we get just sort of nice. Nice isoquants. these nice straight lines. There's to be lots of them, one for each different level of production. Any questions, problems? So my suspicion would be that your profit maximising level here is probably gonna end up being to either use machines or use workers, whichever is cheaper. If you can use either interchangeably, you're not gonna end up using a mix of these things. You're gonna look at this and go, well, I can use one worker or one machine, a worker costs $2 a machine costs $3 I'm gonna use workers. And only workers and no machines. Right, or vice versa. This is not really pro this is probably not real world accurate in most cases, because again, there's not really the the outcome here that you get pretty quickly of only use workers or only use machines doesn't seem reasonable for almost any actual circumstance you could think of. This feels like it's a bit too strong. Um, you might have inputs that have no ability to substitute, as you were as, as, as was, as was asked about earlier. It's entirely possible. Uh, what we're talking about in that case, labour, capital, is, well, to produce something, to produce for each, each unit of production requires one worker and 2 machines, right? I wanna make a unit of production, I need 1 worker and 2 machines, and that gets me 1 unit of production. And if one widget, and if I have more machines, it doesn't matter because I have only 1 worker to work them and one worker can only work 2 machines, and if I have more workers, it's completely useless because one worker can work 2 machines and so extra workers are just sitting around doing nothing. Right, and so we get our nice clean L shaped. I so wants. If there's just no way to substitute between these, if we need both of the goods. Questions problems. Probably And of course our usual case of partial substitutes like Cobb Douglas, well then we're talking about our usual case. Right, we're talking about those niceboy niceo ones. But we can substitute, but not indefinitely and not infinitely, and this feels again a lot more realistic, right, we're gonna get nice outcomes from this kind of model like if wages go down, then we hire more workers and we hire more workers and fewer machines, right, if wages go down and we want to have a a particular production level, we get more workers and fewer machines, machines become more expensive, then we get more workers and fewer machines, and vice versa. Um, so we get all the nice results from here and it seems not unreasonable. Right, if this has all of our nice properties like strictly diminish strictly positive but diminishing marginal product of labour and capital, right, here we don't have strictly diminishing marginal product of labour and capital, that's actually that's not. Quite true, so I'm not gonna say that, in the same production, but here we have diminishing marginal product of labour and capital, which is what we would expect. I will, I will say here we don't have strictly positive marginal product of labour or marginal product of capital because sometimes these things, these isoons are perfectly flat or perfectly vertical. So there's just no use of extra labour, no use of extra capital. OK. We're good now, everyone was good, everyone was happy. Let's have our usual production function. And we have some ISO wants And this is where our, our big A term at the front here, our productivity term comes in useful because we can ask things like, what happens if, productivity goes up, what would we expect to see happening within our, within our, um, Our isoquan curves, our our collection of all isoquan curves, right, this is 3 of them, but if we have a collection of infinitely many. What happens to them when A increases? We get steeper, flatter. They will move towards the origin is our way of saying it and it is right, but we can say it in a way that I think gives us more insight, and they all move towards the origin. Which is that this is a weird sentence, the collection of isoquaants, the curves themselves aren't really changing, right, the curves are all still the same curves, right? That curve that I've labelled as Q0 here, that's still gonna be an iso, when A goes up, that's still gonna be an isoquant, right, it's gonna be an isoquan at a different production level. But if, you know, if point X and point Y were making the same amount of production under under this production function. Then they're still gonna make the same amount of production. Under this, Production function, where a hat is bigger than A, right, where we've just made a bigger. Right, X and Y still make the same production level because they make a higher production, but they make, Still have the same, sorry, they still have the same as each other, a higher production level but the same as each other, um, so instead of making Q0 we make, I don't know. More than that, I'm actually gonna use black, I'm gonna put some numbers for these cos I think it'll be easier. Alright, this was Q equals 10, Q equals 12, Q equals 14. And we increase productivity. And so now this is actually, it's still the same line, but now this is Q equals 12. This is Q equals I've done some terrible numbers here, let's let's make numbers that actually are easy for me to do. Q equals 24. U equals 36. Right, the isoquants don't change, just the amount of production on each isoquan changes, which you can think of as them shifting inwards, um, but it shifting inwards in a very, very specific way which is that the collection of isoquants doesn't change. Um, and so when we talk about production increases, it doesn't change. The input collections that create the same output, right, it just makes us more productive, it gives us, gives us more stuff at every level, doesn't change what the levels look like. Which is kind of nice. Right, we get some nice outcomes from that. Smashing through things, so troubling. Any questions, problems? And Sons OK. We've kind of finished production now, right, production is, as with, I'll I'll do a little bit of prefacing first. As with consumers, with consumer theory, we, we made that hard distinction between um the benefit from consumption, which is our utility, I and, and is so utility curves, so indifference curves, as a very distinct thing from, The budget constraints, right, um, for production we do the same thing, for production we have over this side we have production, which is how they, how that production function works and what our iso iso quantum things look like. And on the other side we have costs of production, which, and we're gonna talk all about costs of production. I will say one thing about cost of production, then we'll have a short break. The one thing I'm gonna say about cost of production is accounting costs versus economic costs, right, remember that when we talk about economic costs, we're talking about all the costs that are relevant to the decision, the explicit costs, the implicit or opportunity costs, which are mostly going to come through um through rental costs of capital. Um, whereas accounting costs are literally just the monetary cost of doing a thing. When economists stand up and say profits zero in the long run in a perfectly competitive market, we're not idiots, we're just not talking about accounting profit, right, we know that firms make 6 to 7%. Accounting profit as a normal amount of profit, right, it's the that's the that's the return to capital, right, broadly speaking, that's the the expected return to capital that comes through here as a return to as as a cost of capital, um, so profit being zero in the long run isn't profit being zero in the long run isn't, A silly thing to say, it's just talking about profit in a very specific way which takes into account economic costs. Zero profit means zero economic profit, means normal economic profit, normal returns to capital, um, rather than something, rather than something else. With that said, we will have a short break now because this is a natural place to have a short break. Uh, it's 11:54, so we'll reconvene at 12 o'clock. Thanks. OK. Um, I Uh, I wanna. Numbers are about Of the game, a game of chicken. Uh, we're gonna. Um, it's scope, it's scope. struggle And they're gonna be one. Right Oh And tariff stuff you could include in that that sort of aspect. of the assessment of the project, but I probably wouldn't, wouldn't advise doing the whole project. I'll call in the next week, yeah, make. Or even or even It certainly, certainly can be done. I, I, um. I Because I just wanted to make sure Like I mean like Yeah. Oh sorry, yeah, so I Really we Go, lot. Oh yeah. Oh no, no. You know. Yeah Alright, 12 o'clock, so we will. Get stuck back in. OK, so cost of production, done production now, now we talk about the other side which is the the downside of production, right? We said firms, what firms would love to be able to do is to have infinitely many goods which they sell at a phenomenally high price and cost nothing to produce. Firms can't do that when they if they want more stuff, the downside of having more stuff is that they need to make it and they need to pay to make it. Uh, because we have 22 inputs into our production, we have one input is labour. labour works from our modelling perspective exactly the way that we think of it working, because it's a natural way of modelling this that I think works well for the way we think about labour, which is that you hire a worker for an amount of time and you pay them a wage. Cool, right, this is how labour works, and so you hire labour L for an hour at wage dollars per hour. Done, easy, fine. Any questions? Lovely. Capital, for our modelling purposes, because we want to be able to put it in the same sort of batch of things that we're putting labour in, capital's gonna have to work a bit differently, which is kind of unfortunate. Capital's gonna have to work a bit differently than our natural way of thinking about it, because I've always been talking about like we, we, Hire a worker and we have a computer, that's not quite how we should be thinking about it for our purposes of costs, because, hiring a worker is is dollars per hour, right, whereas having a computer is just a single batch of money and you can't really add those up or compare them, right, you can't compare what's it's a pain. Compare dollars per hour to just dollars. Um, so when we talk about when we talk about labour, we talk about it like this, the way we would expect, number of hours, wage per hour. When we talk about capital, we're gonna do the same kind of thing. We don't talk about owning a computer, we're talking about, we talk about renting a computer in the same way that we don't talk about owning a worker. We hire a worker, we hire a computer. Right, so we hire a computer, so when we talk about capital costs, it's that we rent the capital, we rent the capital at some rate R. And so we take our our our computer, which we have computer, you know, or rather the machine, we hire our machine some number of machine hours, so K is gonna be our number of machine hours, and R, which is our rental rate of capital, is the dollars per machine hour. Um, that we, that we have the machine. And so that's completely that's that's fine, right, we could do that, you could actually be renting the capital, right, you could be the kind, you could be, you know, a firm who is, Actually legitimately renting its capital in for some amount of time, more typically firms do buy the capital and they have them, um, and so you do, they do actually own the capital, uh, to square that circle we say if you own the capital, you could have, you could use it for your thing that you're using it for, or you could instead have rented it to some other firm at that rental rate of capital R. And so by choosing to use the capital instead of renting it out to someone else, you're incurring an opportunity cost, right, you're losing out on the fact that you could have earned dollars per machine hour by renting it by using it yourself. Um, so you, it's, it's not an explicit cost, it's an it's an opportunity cost, but we include opportunity costs. Um, and so for the, for capital, we talk about K being number of machine hours, R being the either the rate that you are actually paying to hire the machine or the rate that you could have earned had you rented it out, and so you have forgone earning that because you're using it instead of renting it to someone else. By the way, it's R dollars per machine hour and then K is number of machine hours. Those are gonna be our costs, you might want to think that there's entrepreneurial costs, perhaps there's an entrepreneur sitting in the middle here, who is entitled to some level of income, maybe, maybe not, we're not gonna worry about it too much, we're gonna focus on labour and capital. Um, But yeah, as I say, labour is straightforward, capital's a bit weird. They, they're treated the same way. Any sorry, because they're treated the same way, but because firms typically own capital, they typically don't own. Worker. Most cases. Questions, problems. So when we talk about our costs, cost of input K&L, our CC is gonna be our cost of production of using K units of capital and L units of labour is W times L is the cost of labour, right? W dollars per labour per per human hour times number of number of human hours, plus R times K, right, rental rate of capital, dollars per machine hour, K is number of machine hours. And so that's gonna be our costs of production, and so our costs of production are gonna be nice and, Across the production on our, why did that happen? Our cost of production in our KL space, oh sorry, in our. LK space are gonna be pretty much, you know, it's. It's linear, right, our costs are linear, same way as our budget constraint was linear, but our costs are linear, right, we could have lots of capital, we could have some amount of labour, we could have exactly half that much capital and half that much labour. These are all the same costs. And so these are What do we reckon we call these kinds of lines? We had our isoquants. What are these ones? I saw costs, excellent guess. These are our ISO cost lines because they are lines with the same cost. Um, we have ISO costs lines, and we have a whole bunch of Iso costs lines, right, this is a this is a moderately priced line, this is a cheap line, this is an expensive line. They're all lines joining points that have the same cost of production. Suppose that our firm is wanting to produce Q0 output and our firm wanting to use Q0 output. Had an isoquant. Or Q0 that is this red line here. We could have our, oh, that's a bad. C equals 1, C equals 2. Equals 3. Our firm who wants to reduce output and wants to, you know, minimise costs to do so. This looks very similar to our previous work, a little different in one respect which we'll talk about, but hopefully it's pretty clear what the firm would choose to do, they would choose to produce, With this much capital and labour here. One person said no. One person said no. Who reckons they choose to produce. Yeah, if they're cost minimising firms. Anyone down here? This has minimum cost, this has lower cost, that looks nice. Obviously it's not enough production, right? I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm sorry, I don't know why I did this bit, but obviously choosing to produce at point X, right, that would be the cost minimising level that actually produces Q0. Uh, which is where our ISO cost line is tangent to our ISO quant line. The one difference I I feel that we have between or a difference that we have between the production side and the consumption and the and the consumer side, um, is we really do have a target level of here we have a target level of production, right, so we have one Ioqua line which is the line that we need to hit as a level of production, which is our curved line. We have lots of iso costs lines. Right, which are, which are our straight lines that are kind of like our budget constraints. That is different than our consumer side, right, because with our consumer side we had one budget constraint that was fixed for the fix for the consumer and then they tried to maximise their, their utility like by picking the indifference curve that was the best one. Here we have a fixed isoquant, and we're picking the ISO cost that minimises cost. So it's very similar and the logic that gets us there. It's very, very similar, um, but it is different for reason, and, and we'll talk about it, talk about that further in just a second. Um, I'm not gonna write this all up because I don't think I really need to, uh, mathematically, what we're looking at is setting the marginal rate of technical substitution equal to the, The price ratio, but now it's not a price ratio, it's an input costs ratio, I mean I say price ratio here, but it's an input costs ratio, and so we end up like by setting those two things being equal, we get our optimality condition. This this looks a lot like the optimality condition we had before, it's just instead of having, you know, recall previously it was. Right on the consumer side. It was the marginal utility of good X over the price of good X, is the marginal utility of good Y over the price of good Y. Well now it's the marginal product of labour over the price of labour, over the wage should be equal to the marginal product of capital over R, which is the functionally the price of capital. And again, hopefully our intuition is that this makes a lot of sense, right, we're trying to keep costs down, we want to get a particular level of production, we want to keep costs down, how are we gonna do that, we're gonna pick our level of input, our level of labour and capital, so that the bang for the buck that we get from each extra dollar that we spend on labour, is marginal product of labour over the wage, is the same as the bang for the buck that we get for each dollar spent on capital, which is marginal product of capital over the rental rate. Um, so the optimality condition here. Hopefully, Makes sense intuitively and also makes sense sort of from our graph, right, the point X has that property of marginal technical substitution is equal to that price ratio. Questions? No, I'll do one more thing first. As I sort of pointed out, there is this kind of duality here, it's not identical, it is a duality rather than an identity between these two things, right? On the consumption side, what the consumers are trying to do is maximise their utility subject to being stuck on a specific level of income, right, subject to being stuck on a specific budget constraint, how do they maximise utility, um, whereas on the production side, We're tending to think of firms doing the first one, minimising the cost of production for a given target quantity. But we want to produce 100 widgets, what's the cheapest way we can do that? Um, and so, but you, you can take the dual problem, right, for consumption, you could say we have a target utility level, what's the cheapest way to do that? Um, on the production side, you could say we have a total cost, we have a total amount of money we're gonna spend on production, um, what's the best thing that we can do, what's the, what's the maximum amount we could produce for that? Um, and so these two things are a duality theory, are a duality problem. Right, maximising utility for a given income versus minimising the cost to reach a given utility level, these are dual pro these are what are called dual problems, uh, minimising the cost of production for a given quantity or maximising that produced for a given level of total cost, these are dual problems, and if you go through and you did, you know, A lot of graduate study in economics, or a bit of mathematics, um, you can talk about duality theory, which talks about the conditions under which these things are equivalent, under which these things are the same problem, they're pretty general conditions, anything that you can think, it's it's weird situations where this doesn't work, right, under normal circumstances. maximising, minimising the cost of production for a given quantity or maximising the amount produced for a given total cost, kind of give the same kind of give the same answer. Um, that's kind of nice is that these things. Work the same way. Cos they, I mean, in our world, they both do this as the optimality requirement. OK, there was a lot there. Any questions, questions, problems? Sure, uh, yeah, so the question, the question there was where does the price of the good come into play, because there's no P here. It'll come into play in, in sort of a next step of the problem, so we'll talk about basically next, but basically it comes into play next week. Um, so here we're still kind of focusing on that production question of how much capital and labour do we choose to use for some specific for the particular level of production, um, and, It doesn't come in there, where price is gonna come in is in figuring out, Which Q 0 is the best one? Um, so it is gonna be important, but it's gonna come in later when we talk about profit maximisation. Um, profit maximisation is, is downstream of cost minimization. You you cost minimise to choose how you're gonna produce the goods. And in some sense after that, once you've figured out how you produce the goods most cheaply, you then also separately look at how, how many goods do we produce. Uh, and that, and how many goods we produce is gonna depend on the the the underlying price of the good. So it will come up, it'll come up next week. A good question. Questions. Yeah. We talk about expansion paths. So these, these are, these are things that did really come up a fair bit actually when we was asked as a question a couple of times in the consumer theory side, um, and it's not that relevant for consumer theory, but for producers it is a bit more relevant. And so our expansion path is, we're talking about our our KL space. And we want to say, as our desired level of production increases, So here we have, here we're talking about for a specific level of production. Peak level of production, what inputs do we choose to use? For expansion piles, we want to say, as our desired level of production increases, how does our capital labour input mix change as that as that desired amount of production increases. Um, and so you might have something like, as before, right, um. Yeah, let's start with the easiest version of this, which is our perfect substitutes. Teribly drawn line. And so for our expansion path, for this one, this is hopefully a relatively straightforward expansion path if we want to produce 1 unit, if we want to produce, first of all, 0 units, then we use 0 capital and zero labour. If we want to make one unit, then we use, then we would minimise cost by producing here because any extra capital or labour would be useless. If we want to make 2 units have a different colour, make 2 units, we produce here, 3 units we produce here, and so we get an income we get a sorry an expansion path. Of Joining up all those points. That for a given level of production would be the input mix that we would use to create that. So if we want to make 2 units, we find where the expansion path hits Q equals 2, and that's gonna be the input, input, sorry, yeah, the the capital labour mix that we use to create 2 units. The easy part, this is the easier one. Questions, problems, just to lock in the concept. Good. OK. We could have Bob Douglas. Right, we can have a Cobb Douglas world where we have nice, So all, all of our um I of quants are bowed in, but they're all bow in a kind of a similar way, and we can talk about cost minimization, right, so we have, These nice, I'm actually, I'm actually gonna start with the indifference curves so I can make sure I get these drawn well enough. What need actually. Ah, with the, sorry, with the. Good. We have some ISO cost. Lines And we have our production levels. do Just sorting myself out. Then we're gonna have our iso quants. I get a good version of this. And so for Cobb Douglas, we're ultimately gonna end up, With something that looks like. This for our expansion piles, our iso cost as always a nice nice and parallel. Here we have the labour is quite expensive. Um, but it's also very productive, right? Beta, which is gonna be our, our, our power to L, right? K to the alpha, beta, beta, beta here is a lot bigger than alpha, just because of how this has ended up being drawn. That's why, that's why these isoquants aren't sort of symmetric. They're, they're bow they're pushed towards having more labour. Um, what you get from Cobb Douglas for expansion paths, one of the, one of the neat things, the easy things for Cobb-Douglas, is that you end up with expansion paths being nice straight lines. Right, your expansion path is gonna depend on a bunch of stuff. Your expansion path's gonna depend on the relative costs of the two goods, right, on, on wage versus, um, on wage versus interest wage versus uh rental rate of capital. Um, because you can kind of see, hopefully you can kind of see that if we were to make labour cheaper, make all those isoquaant lines flatter, you're gonna get a whole bunch of different points being the expansion path, right, your expansion path's gonna change, but what's nice for Cobb Douglas, and we won't go through the mathematics, but you can, I think the textbook does, but you can, is that our expansion paths are constant. If we want to make twice as much stuff in a Cobb Douglas world. And the cheapest way to do that is to double our double our labour or is or to increase our labouring capital by the same proportions. Um, this is a thing that you can demonstrate, and it's a particular property of what's a not unique to Cobb Douglas, but it is a property of that Cobb Douglas production function, it comes out of that Cobb Douglas production function, uh, which makes things neat and tidy. Um, I haven't demonstrated this, I don't really want to. One could, right, it's a it's just a big pile of maths to show that the expansion path is is a is a straight line here. I think it's obvious in the left-hand side case, right, in the, in the perfect compliments case, it's not obvious in the Cobb Douglas case, but it is true. Any questions, problems? Lovely, there is no special reason why this would have to be true, right, you could certainly have a world where your expansion path looks completely different, um, so there's no special, There's no special thing saying your expansion path can't. Do all sorts of weird things. Right, that would be Totally fine, there will be a production function that will do this. I don't know what it will look like, but you could have a production function that would have this property, right, that has these weird expansion baths. Again, I should be I should be much better at labelling everything. LA mainly for good practise. So cost I so So we increase production level. We find we we cost minimise by setting tinal substitution equals to the price ratio, and our, our optimal points here have this sort of weird shape because they could have any shape, right, as long as they're moving up to the right, they could have any shape. Nice shapes, that's nice. Questions, problems. Issues. These are nice things. We have so much time, I am actually gonna push on a little bit um because we've done some of these things. Cost curves, so from expansion paths, we end up getting one of the things we get out of that is we get the total cost of producing que units of output, right, because if we go back to our expansion curves and we want to produce, Q equals 17. If we want to produce 17 units of output, how much does that cost? Well, that costs C equals 23. That costs $23 to produce the 17 outputs because we Q equals 17, we go to the ISO cost line that's on, and we're done, right, that that's how we would do this. That's how we would figure out the cost from these things. And so one thing we get from that is we get total cost of producing queue units, and we'll call that the total cost of queue. And that's good, right, that's that's really handy, that's something that we have. When we talk about total cost here, it's a derived quantity, right, the cost, Cost definitionally is our function of K and L W L plus RK. When we talk about total cost of producing some quantity, the total cost of of producing some quantity, it's the smallest cost that makes that quantity, right, so it's the, it's the smallest, We minimise the cost, we choose K&L to minimise the cost of producing so that. I don't want to say that. I'm not gonna say this, it's fine, um, I'm gonna focus on, it's a derived quantity in as in. There's no function that the firm has from above, the function has their production function, which is, which is given by the gods, right, given by given by the modeller as your production function. Cost your cost function is is generic, right, it's just WL plus RK. Your total cost function of producing Q units, right, total cost as a function of Q is a derived quantity that's derived from your minimization problem. We get that total cost from the fact that you have already minimised the cost of production. I'm emphasising this a little bit because I see a lot of people come in and say, well how do we, you know, How do we get rid of costs and people are like, well we could reduce you know we could become more efficient, like you, total cost is already you being maximally efficient, right, the total cost function has embedded in it the fact that you've already picked capital and labour the most efficiently you can to produce this level of output. That's what, that's what this is, it's the cost of the inputs that are most efficient that produce Q. Um, A lot of emphasis there, which is good. Total cost, the cost of the inputs that most efficiently produced to you. Any questions on this point? Questions problems, took me a while to get there but we got there in the end, I think. Other things that we might care about, we might care about marginal costs because we tend, it seems a lot to care about things like marginal costs, um and so that's the derivative, Of total cost, right, we talk about how total cost changes, so normally in micro one it's the extra cost of producing one extra unit of the good. Here we, we go a bit further and we say it's the infinitismal cost, right, it's the it's the marginal cost, it's the derivative of total cost as we change as we change the amount we want to produce. We can talk about the average cost of producing Q units, the total cost of making units divided by the number of units that you make, um. We can talk about interrelationships between these different things, and perhaps the main one, gonna be the most important one that would hopefully have been emphasised really heavily in micro one is this idea that if QStar is the thing that minimises average cost, then the marginal cost of Qtar and the average cost of Qtar have to be, are definitionally the same, right? So that is to say, if we're minimising average cost, One of the Dollars, I think this is actually, dollars per unit. And we look at our average cost of production. Our average cost will typically have this sort of general shape to it. Average cost of producing Q. Units If QStar is our level of production that minimises costs, that minimises average cost, Then we know something about what the marginal cost looks like there, right, um, and it's not too onerous to argue that our marginal cost curve, Has to have this sort of shape to it. A marginal cost of producing 2 units. And it has to, has to have that that intersection at the minimum average cost. There's a bunch of ways you can make an argument for that, who who's familiar with that idea from micro one? Everyone, fantastic. We should make sure that we have our arguments in mind for why that is, um, there's two, there's two levels at which you can make this argument, I'll make one of them now and I'll post one of them online. Um, one of the ways that you make this argument is based around it is sort of a, um, Roughly speaking, an intuition argument, which is that if we're in a world where average cost is decreasing, right, if we're at, You not. And so having more quantity means average cost is decreasing. The only way that's possible is if the marginal cost is less than the average cost, right, if on average so far, goods have cost $100 each, and the next good only costs $50 to make, well then if you make it, And pay $50 then the average cost will have gone down, right, because the first bunch of goods cost $100 each, on average, the next one costs $50 so the new average is gonna be somewhere between $50 and $100 right, it's gonna be lower. And so when the marginal cost is below average cost, average cost has to be sloping downwards. Similarly, when we're up at Q1. Marginal cost is above average cost, and so on average goods have cost $100 to produce so far, but now the next good costs $150 to make. If you make that good, then the average cost is now the new average cost will be above $100. And so average cost is upwards sloping. The only way to square those two pieces of information is if the graph has pretty much, and assuming average cost has that nice U shape, is basically that we're in this world. It's kind of the only thing that is possible. Um, so we will have this as a requirement. You can also get here through taking derivatives and fiddling around a little bit. I'll post that online as an alternative way of working through this problem. We talk about costs, we're gonna care about that for our cost curves. OK. We're in the long run is actually a little bit tricky, and we have the entire day tomorrow, I might, Finish up Early for us. And talk about short run and long run. Next time, which is tomorrow. Means we're done for today. As always, if you have any issues, very happy to have a chat. If you don't have any issues, that's also fine. Um, that's what we have for now. If you have any questions, you can come to me now, otherwise I'll see you all tomorrow to talk about short-run versus long-run cost curves, and then next week we'll be able to talk about profits and bring in prices of goods and things like that. Thanks. been so
