SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.

SPEAKER 2
Alright, good afternoon, everyone. Hello, can you hear me? Cool. Is it too loud? Should I not scream? OK. Um, hello, everyone. Thanks for being here. This is EE 2007, 40076007. Um, can you see this? well enough? I, I have no way of blowing the front light, so either I turn all lights off or it's like this. But I think you can see. OK. So I'm just running through a bunch of announcement slides and then we'll do econome we start doing econometrics. I hope I'm not in your way as I pace around here. Um So here's my motivation slide. This is a very lame one. So econometrics, I like econometrics. I'm an econometrician because it combines economics. What am I saying? Maths, uh, data analysis, statistics, and coding and one, but let's read the definition first of what I think econometrics is. I probably got this from Wikipedia. Um, econometrics is the science of using economic theory and statistical techniques to analyse economic data. In addition to that, I'm emphasising just below, like I already said, it also requires a lot of maths and coding. OK. I'll try to keep the maths at a low level. This is the introductory EAT course, OK. Um, so I, I will focus mostly on. What am I saying here? intuition and concepts, OK. But I'll, I'll outsource the maths to sort of a dedicated workshop session that I, that I do here in this space in the 2nd hour every week, not starting today. Um, yeah, so I, I think it's a cool combination of a Uh, important disciplines and um I'll try, I, I'll try to convince you throughout the semester that it is actually cool or at least not so bad, OK? Um Turning to course logistics, mechanics, um, I'm your lecturer. My name is Jurgen. I just call me Jurgen. Um, I run this course, but I have three very important, uh, helpers, tutors, and they are Pan, Shenzhen, and Anita. Um, they are tutoring the weekly computer labs that start next week. OK. Um, so we, we are trying to be, be nice to you. Mostly, we succeed and please be nice to us as well, and we'll have a good semester, OK? So this is us. Um, What else? I'll just run through the slides and then I'll talk as stuff occurs to me. Uh, please interrupt me if you have questions. Um, so weekly meetings every week, you can find us at the following events. So there's this 2 hour event here which will be a combination of lecture and workshop. By workshop I means of problem solving exercises that I work through. And uh we're saying this year already, but I'll talk, talk about this in a second. And yes, this year is supposed to be recorded. Then there's a one hour computer lab starting next week, and they, this, this year, this semester around Thursdays and Fridays, as, as you would have seen. And they are small group discussion based, so they are not being recorded. And then the generic advice is you supplement this with 6 to 8 hours of private study, or 15 hours depending on how much you struggle, OK. Could be 2 hours if you don't struggle, but it's up to you. So, 8 hours is not the max. Feel free to study more. All right, I won't stop you. Um, but you know, you need a good work-life balance as well. That's important for your mental health. So this session here. It is a combined lecture workshop session. Today, it's just gonna be a lecture. We're in the first hour roughly, and so the split is roughly 1st hour, 2nd hour. Uh, I run through the lecture material. And, and the 2nd hour, I do the workshop. And the lecture is quite fast paced, and I guess I, I work on the assumption, on the brave assumption that you read the slides, and engage with the slides before coming here. OK. So this was the 6 to 8 hours of self-study. Do you remember that? It was just 2 seconds ago. Um, so I, I want to pace through this, and I do actually pace through this because I know the problem solving questions that I want to work through. I go, I need at least half an hour to work through these, and I pace myself to the lecture and there's at least half an hour left, and then I'll do problem solving with you. Um Econometric exercises, analytical, mathematical exercises. All right, what else am I saying here? Yeah Yeah, right, that's enough. For the computer labs, so they start next week. Um, most of you would be enrolled. Is that correct? Fair assumption. Um, now at the beginning of the semester, they can do a little bit of reshuffling and that's fine. You don't even need to tell me this. I'd say you enrolled for, I don't even know if this exists, Thursday 11 a.m. and you go, but you really want to go to Friday 11 a.m. You can do that, OK? Um, if not everyone does this, so that everyone goes to the Friday session, then that's fine, but sort of, uh, random reshuffling we can cope with and then you just tell the tutor, this is the computer that that I want to keep attending, and that's fine. OK. Um, so enrolling for tutorials is a guidance, and most of you will go to the one that you've enrolled for, but if, if on occasion it doesn't work for you, then you go to another one. OK? If you want to make another one, your permanent tutorial, I'll just tell your tutors, and that's probably OK. And you don't need to re-enroll or something like that. Don't bother us with with that stuff, OK? You can, but you don't need to just feel free to go to another one. But for the sake of us sort of tracking your attendance and participation, tell your tutors that that's what you plan to do. In those computer labs, you work through applied econometric exercises. You get a data set and you work through data. You would have done data analysis, I'm guessing in your stats course. Is that true? Yeah, so it's a bit similar. Um did you use Python in that? What did you use? Do you know what you use Excel? Oh really? Oh my goodness. OK, you're using Python. Who has used Python before? OK, everyone. OK, it's not required. OK. It's not required. What am I saying here? Oh well, we'll teach you that if you don't know what Python is, or Jupiter, is it Jupiter? No, it's Jupiter, uh, we'll teach you that. I'll say more about that in a second. At the end of the semester, you can add this to your CV fluent in Python. OK? And all of a sudden you earn $20,000 more every year. Um, Yeah. Oh yeah, and I, I'll give you some more details on this, but we do recommend. That you bring your own device. By that, I, I really mostly mean if you have a laptop to bring that along, but a tablet would work as well. In fact, you can run Python on your iPhone or whatever, uh Android phone. Um, so I'll I'll expand on that in a second. And regarding the computer labs, um, there are a total of 5 labs currently scheduled. Um, 4 of these are in regular tutorial rooms, like in the aunt, I think they're all in the CBE building actually. Um, just the regular classroom, so no computers. I go, where are the computers coming from? You, OK. I see a lot of computers here. It's worked last year, that's when we introduced this for the first time. We moved the computer labs, our computer labs, out of a dedicated computer room into a regular tutorial room because we found that most students prefer to bring their own computers. And are able to as well. For those of you who are who are not, we have a dedicated computer room, uh. Once a week, um, on Fridays at 11, in the Copeland building at the bottom, there's a, a ground floor, there is a Computer room that you that that actually has PCs, desktops there. And that you can attend. Um, so any questions about that? So, uh, some of you might be already enrolled for this. OK, and you didn't know this was in that particular room, which is fine. You can still bring your laptop to this lab here and work on your laptop instead of using the university computer, OK? But for those of you who, who are not able to provide their own device, uh, which, which happens, of course, on occasion, this is your lab to attend, OK? Um, any questions on, on this? continue. I need you to get Python ready if you aren't already. Most of you probably are not, and we help you with that. Um, we will be using Python for our applied data works. So I said, I give you a spreadsheet, but you will not be working Excel, you will be working with Python. And the way you are interacting with Python is through so-called Jupiter notebooks. It doesn't need to mean anything right now. We teach you that. Jupiter notebooks are a convenient way of writing and running Python code, but also writing texts. It's like a word processor as well. OK, not, not really, but you can think of it like that. You can make annotations, write notes to yourself. So not just run code but also type text, put tables and figures, and write mathematical formula. So it's it's a good way of interacting. With Python but also writing a document up for your, for yourself and it's almost like you can write a research report in it and this is in fact what we asked you to do in the middle of the semester with your first assignment and we will guide you along the way so. And doesn't all have to happen this week. And best of all, you can do this, this Jupiter notebooks and Python, um. You can set this up for free on your own computer. Um, Or device, uh, it could be your iPad or your telephone. Um, and how can you do this? Next slide. Two ways that there's many ways of doing this. Two ways that that worked for us last year is first, Anaconda is the way you go if you're the type of person who likes to install stuff on their own computers like you want to fiddle around, install a programme, actually not, doesn't require sort of developer skills, OK. Anyone can do this. Anaconda is a very user friendly open source sort of package manager for scientific computing. OK. And they guide you through how to install uh Jupiter and Python on your machine. That's done on your computer, it takes space on your computer. Um, I've said in the past that that was our recommended option, but last year, I think most people chose the, the cola option. They don't follow my recommendations, which is fine. So the second option is the, the browser-based option, where, uh, let me just read through it. We use what's called Google Cola. So it's a Google product. With co app you're essentially running Python in a web browser. OK, so no installation on your local computer. Installation is on a Google computer, probably somewhere in the United States. I don't know if they've got services in Australia. They probably do, but you don't know where the stuff is running. Just pointing out, you don't put sort of private information on then there's no need to, but you can write your econometrics homeworks there if you want. Most people don't have any issues with that. Um, so for small applications, using Google Call app is free, and our all our applications qualify as small. Because it is cloud-based, by cloud-based, I mean, you run it on a remote computer that is provided by Google. Uh, you can run code in many different ways on your own laptop, desktop, the university computers, your iPad. Mobile phone, or my old Commodore 64, which probably doesn't mean anything to you. OK. So, You could literally go to the computer, use this, this is an iPhone, you go to Safari, open Google and run. I'm not recommending this. It's not good for your eyes, but that's just me, an old person talking, but you could, right? So the point is all you need is access to a web browser which I think it's safe to say 99% of you have, OK, um, but I should, should say also you do need a Google account for that Google Gmail addresses and and um you need to store the data that we give you in in spreadsheets in Google Drive. I have detailed information on how to set either of these up on my website, which we visit in a second, OK? And I will give this to you as a surprise, surprise. Homework. It's the only homework that we do this semester. If, if you count the assignments or if you ignore the assignments, they're not really homework, but uh the homework until next week going into your computer lab is to get Python ready. Um, so we need you to do that, please, um, for our work to go as smoothly as possible so that we don't spend the first weeks 2 and weeks 3 of the semester troubleshooting your computers. Um, we, we want to run programmes already to get, uh, Python and Jupiter onto your computers. It's relatively easy to do. We didn't have problems last year and, and we are willing to help, OK, but we can't help everyone, so the 120 students, and most of you don't need help. Um, so on my website, which we go to in a second, I guide you. Through it and it looks very lengthy. It's because I'm guiding you very slowly and carefully. OK. So please do this. Get Python ready. I will send um an announcement as well maybe early next week reminding you to do that so that going into your computer lab next week Thursday or Friday. You rock up there with a computer. Or an iPad and or device and you can run code. Any questions?

SPEAKER 1
Um, do the tutors have a preferred?

SPEAKER 2
They, and we talked this morning, they will bring on their own laptops, connect them to the front panel, so there's an HDMI cable here. Um, in the, in the CPE computer room, hook up their own laptops and they'll project their own screen to the front. They will not use cola, so they have some form of anaconda on the local Python installation. But they work in a Jupiter notebook, so it will look the same. So which option you choose is really doesn't matter. It looks the same. I'm just saying from experience, I think 60% used Google CallA last year. It's called an estimator. We'll learn about estimators in a second, and there's a standard error around this. It could be more, could be less, but my feeling was most people opted call app because it's very movable, tangible, like you can. Uh, you save everything in the cloud, so you work on it in, in your tutorial, and you can go home. And open your notebook on your home computer, for example, um, and you don't have to carry anything with you. All you need is a account, Google account and access to Gmail and GDrive. OK. Away from the computing, more about course logistics. Again, as you would know, there are these assessment items. There are 4 online quizzes run through water, counting 5% each starting in week 3, and I will send you a reminder so it won't come as a surprise. Um, you have like a 24 hour window or something like that. Um, in which you have to work on the quiz. The quiz takes you 45 minutes or something like that. OK, so do you, do you have flexibility to work on it? Um, it's an online multiple choice quiz, and I will fill you in on the details, uh, When should I do this? Probably 2 weeks from now in week 3. The, the week 3 quiz opens, I think what I promised is it opens um on the Wednesday of week 3. So, how is it Wednesday today, right? Um. I'll, I'll send you reminders on on what what you would expect there's um it's relatively low hanging fruit. You just click your way through a bunch of questions and most of you do well and uh. You can collect up to 20 points in those 4 quizzes going into the Second, there will be two computer assignments. I guess you could see them as homework assignments, and they count 7.5% each or 15%. They're very similar to what you learn in the weekly computer labs, so we're just testing what you do in the weekly labs. And then your participation in the small group sessions in the computer labs will be assessed as well. No need to stress out too much. Again, only counts 5%. And if you attend, then you probably get probably 3 out of 5. On top of that you participate as well, you move to 4 and 5 out of 5 for participation. Makes sense that attendance would be a necessary condition for participation. I just want to stress that we're not just assessing attendance but also how you interact, and I've asked the tutors to have an engaging session to ask questions so that you guys have an opportunity to answer questions, and then by the middle of the semester I'll give you some, we'll give you some indicative grades on your participation. And this is not, uh, yeah. Again, uh, this is together with the other two, the quizzes, the computer assignments, and the participation relatively friendly assessment items that many of you, you can collect 40 points, um, many of you. We'll get close to that. I'm guessing it's not a promise, right, but the idea is you collect a solid foundation going into the final exam, which is then in the exam period scheduled by the examination office, traditional paper and pencil type test. Unavoidable. And I, I offer you more guidance on the final exam, give you an old one or two old final exams and And then we'll just have to see, OK, um any questions on, on assessment? I think we will become clearer as we go through the semester. Um, contact and consultation. I haven't announced. Alright, so please use this uh very unfriendly impersonal looking email address. Uh, we, it's not that I asked you to send emails to there and then I never look at it. That's, that's not how it works. I check this regularly. I check it, OK. Um, so if you send an email to email 2007, you can go, hi Jurgen, just a question, blah blah blah. Um, but I understand you sent an email to something that sounds like this, you go, who am I talking to? It's me. OK, I'm sitting at the other end. It's just we need this to be sort of sorted um that it's in case in case I somehow can't continue teaching the course, I don't know, hopefully not, somebody else will have access to your emails. Um we just need to have a formal email account and I'm behind this and I'm I'm not just checking once per semester, but once, not once per week, twice, 3 times a week um to answer your questions. But the easiest way really to get your questions answered is by talking to me after the lecture. Um, if you are at the lecture, OK, then, then it's easy to just ask me questions. Um, other than that, I think I put my consultations down for Tuesday mornings. Um, you can see that in the course outline. Um, but I, I will make a wattle announcement as well. And then there's this course website here that you might have seen. This is my GitHub website, we click on it. I don't have to click on it. I've opened it already. For a lot of the lecture material, I'm using my GitHub website. We go there in a second, but I do also use my uh the water website. What am I using water for? I'm using Moto for course announcements, which then I think show up in your emails as well, is that right? Somehow. And The recordings of this lecture will pop up on Wattle, I think. And quizzes, the 4 quizzes that I was talking about will be run on Wattle. And what else? Oh, yeah, when you work on your assignment. And you have to send it to us. You don't email it to us. You upload it to turn it in link or facility that I have made available or will make available on water. I will always communicate this clearly so that there is no confusion what you have to do. But for the lecture slides, for example, the slides that we're looking at right now, the announcement slides, they are on this website here. So let me go to the home page. OK. My GitHub, this what I call my GitHub website because it's hosted on GitUp and you see the links on the left hand side. You can go to the class summary, which I don't want to do now. We can click on lecture slides here and you see the lecture slides. So this year course announcement, we have just read through the lecture slides for week one are already opened up here. So I've downloaded them already. We'll look at them in a second. If you want to see next week's lecture slides, they are there. In fact, all of them are there because I'm. Such an old guy that I've been teaching this, my colleague reminded me for 9 years, unbelievable. My children are almost not that old, actually my son is only 8 years old, um. How is that possible? So that they do, they do change on occasion, but undergraduate econometrics is not, OK, I'm gonna tell you a secret now. It's not so cutting edge that it changes every year. OK, that sounds pretty mean. For my graduate students, yeah, I, I do update the slides more often, but I do go through the slides and I make small changes. And when I make larger changes to the ones that you see there now, As we go along, I might might make changes. If I happen to make surprisingly big changes, I will let you know, OK, but if it's just a change, uh, uh, a symbol here or there, then I might not even tell you about it, OK. What I'm saying is the slides that you find here right now are very likely to be the slides that you will also find there at the end of the semester, OK? Um, and I, I, uh, give you every week the, um, the reading, which refers to the Stock and Watson textbook. Which is a good textbook. Uh, I know textbooks are not so in fashion anymore, but I do recommend that it's it really complements or supplements the lecture. I basically, uh, developed the lecture of that textbook, so that's why I find it particularly useful if, uh, if you have a question you didn't understand a certain part of what I was teaching, you could consult with a textbook and have a good chance of getting clarification. Um, the Stock and Watson textbook. And they do have it in the library, but I do know I'm realistic. I do know that you have other ways. Of reading the textbook. Um, when I say Stock and Watson textbook, I think the title is here and you can Google it and find it. What else? So lecture slides, workshops, I right, workshops. So this is what we do in the 2nd hour of every week, but not this week. So that's why I say no exercises in the first week. Thank God here, OK. So but here look at this, this looks scary. We 2, there's an equation. OK, if this doesn't look good to you and you have the option of not taking this course, don't take the course. OK, but it, it won't be too hard, but it is a bit mathematical. And we will work through this next week in the 2nd hour. I'll try to make time by racing and pacing through the lecture slides of week 2, so that we have at least half an hour to work through this. This stuff is very close to what I teach you in the first hour of next week, or maybe even to what I teach you today. But, so the, the workshop exercises are very, uh, what is it? Close intertwined with with the lecture. OK, so it's not like Falls from heaven has nothing to do with anything that we're covering. No, it's not. We talk about this and then we work through this together and so we'll do this next week and you can see for all all the 12 weeks, the material is already online. I'm not expecting you to work on that beforehand. You could, but you don't have to. The computer labs. Uh, is what you do Thursdays and Fridays with your tutors. Um, first, there's a bunch of data sets. If, if I just put the pointer on it, you can see there, uh, can you see it there? You can. See here it points to a CSV file. A CSV file is a separated value file. You can think of it as a spreadsheet file that you download to your computer or you send it to Google app that you can then analyse with Python. And so the data sets are all here. That we need for this semester, so it's actually not that many. And here for week one, I'm saying don't panic. There are no computer labs this week, but I'm saying get Python ready this week already. For next week I have posted here as you see, I'm pointing on it with the With a mouse, my pointing? I've got my This thing. So here, does it, doesn't have battery, does it? Oh, I know why it doesn't. Oh OK. I have a file a link here to what's called an IPython notebook. That's what I call Jupiter notebook. You open this now, your computer doesn't know what to do with it. But if you, once you get Python ready, your computer will know what to do with it, OK? Um, that contains the computer exercise for week 2. So for this to make sense, you need to get Python ready and then you can open this file here and it includes a bunch of questions that guides you through your first. Applied data exercise in which you're using. Uh, am I saying? What data are you using? I think it will say that in this notebook. I think you use the World Bank data that we saw earlier, the World Economic indicators, so I think the next week, next week's computer lab uses the World Development indicators data set. The instructions are contained inside of this notebook. OK, here, this, this guy, you need to download this to your computer. Have Python on it and, and then you can work through it and the tutors will help you with that. You're not expected to know any of this. We, we help you, but you need to get Python ready, OK? And then Consultation. I am here as my consultation time. I can move this if this is inconvenient. So 10:30 to 11:30 and consultation times or supply is elastic. It's elastic to the demand. If there's no demand, then one hour is enough or too much, but it will never be less than an hour. Um, but if if I get the single from you that you demand more. Consultation, and I can supply that. OK. We start like this, um, and I will announce the tutors will offer consultations as well for, for Python-related questions every week. I will announce these. We're sorting out when and where to have these. Um The quizzes, there's no interesting information here, just about the timing. The quizzes will be served or available on water. Next, your first assignment is already available. Here, as an IPython notebook, you can download that and work on it. You could submit it this week if you wanted to. Not required, OK. Um, I guess I would want you to submit it in week 5, but the strict hard deadline is in week 6, and I would point you to that and remind you of that. So it's already there Your assignment. There are practise exams. I, I, I used the plural, but there's only one. OK. Uh, what else? Here, here's the information under get Python ready here on the left. There's, I scroll through this and it looks very long. That's because I'm talking through it very slowly. It's not difficult at all. I'm just saying, explain each and every little step for for the Google call app option and for the Anaconda option. It's not nearly as difficult as it looks like, but I need you, I said it about 10 times, I need you to get Python ready, and the instructions are found here by clicking get Python ready. You can go the Anaconda way or the Google Collab way up to you. All right. So that's all I wanted to say going into our first lecture. Any questions before we turn to the actual econometrics?

SPEAKER 3
What? No questions.

SPEAKER 2
Yeah. Are the workshops intended to be interactive or passive, I try to make it interactive, but it's, I'm not assessing participation on it. Uh, yeah, I, it's mathematical questions that can be surprisingly interactive. But it really depends on you, but what I'm getting back, the vibes that I'm getting back, but I know it depends on my vibes as well, but uh I'll try to make it interactive. Um, I do not expect you to prepare it, it doesn't hurt. Um, But yeah, we'll see how we go. But your participation is assessed only in the small group sessions, not, not in the weekly workshop that I'm running. Any other questions?

SPEAKER 3
Yeah. I said the assignment was due in week 6. Is that like the beginning of week 6.

SPEAKER 2
Uh, I should, let me, let me look, I don't want to say anything that's wrong. I think I put the information here. Uh, yeah. Wednesday of week 6. But I'll, I'm a bit old fashioned. I go, submit it in week 5. And then what do you think the percentage of students is that's submitted in week 5? Is it 1%? Is it 2% or is it 3%? Uh it's, it's a low percentage, but I, you will find out and I'm not, first of all, I also want to say we are never out to get you. It's not our, like we're not like we'll make you upset or anything, but here I. I show a discontinuity in my own behaviour like where I try to be nice and everything but about deadlines I'm very strict, but I, I give you plenty of warnings in week 4 I'll say, guys, after you finish the week 4 tutorial, the computer lab, you have everything that you need, and this is true, to finish the assignment. So at the end of week 4, and I go, so why not work on this and submit it in week 5, the your solution. And then I'm realistic, not everyone does it, but then I remind you again. The deadline is approaching. Submit it now. Don't wait until you get sick. Then I will, we will not extend the deadline. If you get sick, then you won't submit your assignment and we put the weight on the final exam. Because I've warned you sufficiently, you have 2 weeks to work on this. If you wait the day until the day before the deadline, And you get COVID, which is not good, of course, which also means that you wouldn't work on the assignment. Then I won't give you 5 more days to work on it so you can recover and then work on it. No, no, the deadline is strict. It's this 55 p.m. in the afternoon on that Wednesday, I want your assignment. If you haven't submitted it by then, I need a certificate from a doctor, um, something like that, so that I can rescale your final exam. This is not harsh. I hope I convince you. I'm not trying to be harsh. I'm just saying, you've got 2 weeks to work on something that takes 3 hours maybe if if you dedicate your time to it. Also, you can work with your classmates. Of course you're expected to submit your own work, but it's not that I can that you do your individual work. Up to you. We're all grown ups, OK? You work in groups and then you submit your own work. It takes 3 hours maybe, OK, and you go, let me double what you just said, even if it's 6 hours, you have 22 weeks to work on that. Anyways, I'm, I'm getting obsessed about it already, you can tell, so let me scale this down and let's maybe start doing econometrics unless you have. Other questions? Let's do the stuff that matters, and that is econometrics. And um we still have, what is the time now? Yeah, we still have 12 minutes, and we've got a lot to cover. So we jump right into it. Ah, this works now. That's good. Ah, now it doesn't work. Uh, uh, I think I need new batteries for this thing. All right. So we start with a 2-week, I think it's a 2-week review of probability and statistics, and then we start doing econometrics. So we start with what random variables and probability distributions. So, let's go through it. Three definitions. This, you guys would have done stats 1008 or something like that. So this looks familiar. The mutually exclusive potential results of a random process are called outcomes. And I'll give you an example on the next page. The set of all possible outcomes is called the sample space, and event is a subset of the sample space. OK. The typical statistics example, like the easiest is really flipping a coin. I make it more complicated, rolling a die, OK. Um, an outcome could be 5 dots, and I'm writing it literally as as this physical event, 5 dots. Uh, the sample space, of course, would be 1 to 6 dots on, on a normal die. And an event Could be Uneven dots, even dots or what I write here, 3 dots or 5 dots, you can. Create many events, um, even, even on a diet, you can do that. Um, another example from real life, just to, to signal to you that I, cause I'm an economician and a nerd, I think of life as an opportunity to To see um statistics and econometrics in, in my everyday interactions. So when I go for a walk or run, I'm pretending that I'm running through um Through the local nature reserve, I go, before doing that, there's the, the Um, Random, or the, the statistic experiment is how many kangaroos will I see today? OK. What's the, what's the, what are out, so the, the random process is the number of kangaroos that I spot during my morning run, um, in the local nature reserve, an outcome could be that I observe 5 kangaroos. The sample space is tricky. When I roll a die, it's very clearly defined. OK. Um, as, as a physical experiment, this is a sort of real life um random process. What is the, what are, what is the sample space there? Well, I don't have to precisely define it, but I could just say, well, natural numbers, but it's probably way too much. So in the local nature reserve, I mean you could ask the city how many kangaroos live there. They probably don't know, but uh something like 1 kangaroo all 250 kangaroos, something like that, OK, it's the sample space, but the set of all possible outcomes. And if it's uh you can make this 500 just to be on the safe side, it doesn't really matter. That then has probability 0. That's fine, OK? Um, and an event is that I'm starting my, my walk or run, and I say I'll ask myself, will I see more than 6 karoos, for example, and so many permutations of um or possibilities for um events that you could create with the sample space. A random variable is a numerical representation of an outcome in a random process. So in the rolling a die example, I wrote on the previous or two slides earlier explicitly two dots or one dot. The random variable maps the dot, sort of the physical outcome to a real number or natural number 61, OK, 1.1, 2.2, and so on. You could map. The outcome 1 dot to the number 247, that's fine. It doesn't matter, OK? Uh, it's, it's what a random variable does, sort of it translates the physical outcome. To a real number or maps it. OK. And you would usually pick the obvious candidates. So for rolling a die you choose 123456, but just maybe a better example would be flipping a coin. You have heads or tails, and you map that to 0 and 1. OK. You could also map it to H and T. It doesn't really matter. But uh typically random variables map this two numbers because then we want to do things like calculate averages which require to have a number representation of an event. Random variables save us a lot of notation, so consider the event that I'm interested in not less than 4, but fewer than 10 kangaroos. How do I write this? If my random variable is how many kangaroos will I see today? The event is just captured concisely like this, OK. Alright, all not too difficult. A probability distribution of a random variable is the full characterization of probabilities for all possible outcomes of a random process. Um, Yeah, uh, what am I saying? This is um the probability distribution for what's called a discrete random variable, where you can enumerate the events quite clearly. And for a continuous random variable, you need A bit more, you need to be a bit more technical. Um, I use, let me think, throughout the semester, mostly discrete random errors to, to make our lives easy. Um, and that's why I picked this year as an example, Age of EMAC 2007 students. Now I'm, I'm showing you now a fake uh probability distribution because I don't actually know your ages. I don't have that information. The AU doesn't give that to me. And just for the sake of illustration, suppose the youngest student is 18 and the oldest student is 26. My apologies if you are outside of this range, then you're not in my fake example or in my fake world here. Um, but otherwise I can't, the slide would be too large. OK, so this is a probability distribution that I made up. It's not, it's not the actual age distribution of you guys because I don't know that. This is just for the sake of illustration. So this says, for example, 23% of you are aged 21. OK, these numbers here should should add up to one, OK? And I think they do. OK. And the little Y here is a placeholder for a real number in this case, because we're talking about ages, it's a natural number. And so this notation looks a little bit funny. capital Y or uppercase and little Y. Little Y is the placeholder that runs from 18 to 26, and capital Y is the random variable. So the question is, what's the probability that the random variable Y, the uppercase, is equal to some number little Y, where little Y can be 18 to 26. And that is reported here on the right hand side. So little Y is called the realisation of the random vari. So this should all be relatively easy. That's why I'm running through this. Um, the cumulative distribution is takes. Takes the probability distribution and adds it up. Successively or cumulatively. OK. So, for example, uh, what's the probab I guess the, the cumulative distribution answers the question, what's the probability that let's say if we choose 19, that the random variable Y is at most 19. So you have to combine the probabilities of the for being 18 and 19, which is 5 + 14. So, yeah, 0.05 plus 0.14 is 0.19. It adds it up successively. So it takes the information from the probability distribution and accumulates it successively. I think uh you're all with me, is that right? See some people nodding, that's good, and you have to end up at one here. So for example, 95% of my students, if this was really the distribution, are 23 years and younger. 66% or 21 years and younger, OK. And it's a weak inequality, so that means I always include that one here. So it's not younger than 21 years. It is 21 years and younger. So it's inclusive of the this is just a matter of definition here for discrete random variable, it matters for a continuous one it doesn't really matter. But this is the conventional definition that you have a weak inequality here. And this is how it looks in the picture. This is the actual, it's a clumsy looking picture. This is the actual, it's a histogram, which is sufficient here because we have a discrete probability distribution with 9 outcomes, was it? Um, so this is the probability distribution and this is the cumulative one step function. Any questions? It was easy, wasn't it? Too easy. We have a minute? Oh we have a minute, a minute. What can we do in one minute? We talk about univariate probability and we will talk about bivariate and multivariate next week. Let's let's run through the expected value and then we take a break. Suppose you have a random that takes on K possible value, so I'm giving you a discrete one again. Um, can take on these realisations, Y1 through YK. So these were your ages, 1819, 20, and so on. OK. What's the expected value? It's this object here, symbol E of Y. Is the sum of all realisation times their probability. That thing is called the expected value or also the population mean. Just the mean or the expectation. Sometimes we give it a Greek symbol, mu. I'm giving it a sub why here because sometimes we juggle several random errors at the same time and I'll just tell you mu, and then you go, does this mu belong to the random er Y? or does this mu belong to the random er X? Well, the subscript tells you that. What's important, last message for for the first hour. This here is the expected value. It is not. The average No, it's like, this was my my cliffhanger. Shock. So the uncertainty will be resolved in the 2nd hour. OK. So, take a 10-minute break. I'm happy to answer any questions.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah No I saw the previous slide where you were talking about that. It's distribution of high. Oh, I figure that's the type of. Yes. So high distribution. I'm just wondering. against. that So. Yeah, yeah. I do my final exam. Uh, so yeah, I wish I could. Yeah. Of their relations are conceptual. I don't want to. I, I hope the test Application. Give me a call and and of the and asking you. Yeah. That Yes I So I would say. Yes. I. Yeah. So I. I I like. OK. Yeah. Yeah. But you have. Yeah, No Yeah. And. I was down. Yeah I. Yeah. Yeah 1. Yeah, I yeah. I is. This is. I, I would think that. slides. Yeah. Yeah. Oh Yeah I see, uh, that. This Yeah across Yes. Yeah I. Yeah Yes. Yeah. Yeah. No. No. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yeah. It I always think. Yeah. Um. I. Yeah. So. No. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That And then. She said. Oh. No. Yes. I. I OK, should we continue?

SPEAKER 2
That's good to you. All right, so we, we just defined. The expected value, and this is for a discrete random variable. Because it has finite. Um, realisations. If, if this was for a continuous random variable, how would you change the definition? Yeah, you changed the sum to an integral. And you integrate over infinitely many realisations. But there's no added value of doing this conceptually. This contains the important information, OK? And this is the population mean or the mean or the expected value. It is not the average, but we'll, we'll look at the average maybe 20 minutes from now and contrast it to the mean. For our A distribution, this was my age distribution, my fake age distribution. The, this formula for the expected value evaluates like so. OK. So you take all realisations from 1819 all the way to 26 and multiply them with their probabilities. So 18 gets multiplied with 5%. 19 multiplies, 14% and the, and so on. You work this out, you get 20.96% is the I wanted to say average age, but that's not correct. It's the mean age, OK, and I'll, I'll point out what the difference is the difference is, of course, this presumes knowledge of the actual population rather than a randomly drawn sample of the population. The the population mean of age is 20.96. All right. Mathematical properties of the expectation, ah, this is red. So you would, you would prove these here just off this definition. OK, from Emad one level one, you probably have learned how to deal with the summation operator, have you? I won't ask you, I mean, I, I won't ask you to do it, but you would have that knowledge. And if you apply this formula, you could establish or proof all of these properties here. First, The expected value of a constant is the constant, or you can see the constant as a trivial or degenerate random variable that takes on the same value. Always, OK. C. The expected value of a random variable Y plus a constant is equal to the constant plus the expected value of the random variable Y. And something similar applies to the product of a random variable with a constant. You can just take the constant out in a linear way. Um, and then you can combine that with, and you get this result here. And then the expected value of the sum of two random variables is equal to the sum of the expected value. Same for the difference. And I say, can you prove all of these? You would again, you would, you shake your head. OK, I'll, I'll throw it into the final exam just for you. Um, I might, but I've never done this. Um, if you had to prove it, you would have to go back to this formula here and ask yourself, how to establish that. But I don't want to do it. Then here comes a random definition that we'll need again next week. Just accept it as a definition for now. The earth moment. R, where R is a number like 123, and so on, is defined to be the expected value of the random variable to the power of R. So if R is equal to 1. Then on the right-hand side, we just have the expected value of Y to the power of 1. That thing was called 2 sides earlier, 2 sides ago, the expected value of Y. So the first moment here coincides. By definition, with the expected value of y. OK. Just by definition, you don't have to think too deep about what does this all mean. Plug in R equal to 1, you recover the expected value from two slides earlier, but you can plug in R equal to 2 and then they're not the same. Then if you plug in R equal to 2 on the right hand side, you get the expected value of Y to the power of 2. That by definition is the second moment of the random variable. What concept is related to the second moment? What concept in statistics? I say related, it's not quite the same, yeah. The variance, yeah. The variance is not quite the same, but it can coincide. When the mean is zero. Yeah, so when the mean of a random variable is 0, meaning the first moment, Then the second moment is the variance of the random variable, so digging deeper statistics, but you could just generally accept that the second moment has to do with the spread of the random variable. It's not by definition generally the same as the variance which we will look at in a second, but it captures that feeling. How about the 3rd moment? Why to the power of 3. What does that capture? Yeah. The skewness of the distribution, how symmetric or not it is. OK. And the 4th moment. Yeah, ketosis, what's that? How heavy it is in the tails. OK, oh, OK. Interesting. We will revisit that, um, maybe 1 or 2 weeks, and I'll remind you of that. I did not expect you to know it. But it's these 4 moments are important. The 1st 4 moments are quite important. The first moment is the expected value. The second, the second moment has to do with the variance. It's not the variance, but it's sort of related to it. The 3rd moment captures the symmetry, this symmetry, the skewness of the distribution, and the 4th moment. How many outliers you have in the tails of the distribution? And that has to do later in life, I mean in this course, uh, when we think about properties of estimators, and we'll revisit that, including the definition of these moments at this stage already so that we can use them later. For now they are a little bit isolated here and we move on to something that you are more familiar with probably that is the variance. For a discrete random variable, it's again, using the summation operator. Um, the variance of a random variable is defined like so, what do you do? You take each realisation. Let's say J is equal to 1. You take the first realisation, you subtract off the population mean. So this would probably be a capital sub Y here, it doesn't really matter. So the population mean of the random variable, you squared, and then you times that by the probability of that realisation. And you run through all the realisations. That thing is called the uh the population variants as opposed to the sample variants, which we will look in a second. And if you take the square root of that, that's then the population standard deviation. In the formula And with our fake age distribution, you take all your ages 1819, 20, all the way to 26, you subtract off the population mean that we calculated earlier, which was 29, 20.96. You, you take each realisation. Subtract the mean of 20.96. Square that And times it by the probability of that realisation, and you get the variance of 2.74. And you have learning statistics that that somehow captures the spread of the distribution. If you had two age distributions, let's say I give you the age distribution of EMET 1001 students, you have another variance and say that variance is 3.9, you can compare them, but in isolation you don't really know what to do with this number. It's a sort of more comparative thing if you have two distributions and you can compare variances. And the standard deviation is just the square root of that. Properties of the variants are not as straightforward. Let's go through them. Again, you would establish these here by using this formula there. The variance of a constant is not equal to the constant. Think of the constant, as I said, as the degenerate random variable that doesn't vary. And if the variance captures the variation, the spread of the random variable, then now it makes more sense that the variance of a constant should be zero. Does that make sense? How would you prove that mathematically? Well, just plug that into this formula. Here, we basically get my pointer not working. C minus C, and then they have a 0 there. Um, the variants of A constant lustre random variable is not equal to. Um, the constant plus the variance. The constant doesn't contribute to the variation or to the spread. So it's just the variants of the random variable. So this is different to what happened for the expected value, right? And then likewise, not not likewise, the variance of C times the random variable. Now that becomes C2 times the variance. Uh, a multiplicative constant contributes, amplifies the variance, and amplifies it quadratically. Where does the square come from? Well, if you sort of just take a clever look at this formula here from here. Um, you can sort of just eyeball, um, where this quaratic uh factor would come from. If you have a random variable C times Y, and you take the C out here, it, it is squared. OK. So that's important. Um, so the, as a, as an additive factor, the C doesn't do anything. As a multiplicative one, it does, and it contributes sort of quadratically. And then another surprise here is the variance of the sum is not generally the sum of the variances. So this was, the statement was true for the expected value. The Expected value of the sum, yes, is equal to the sum of expected values, but that statement is not true when we're talking about variances. The variance of the sum of two random variables is the sum of the two random variables, the sum of the two variances of the random variables, plus 2 times the covariance of these two random variables. And we redefined covariances next week. So, but you have a feeling for what it is, so how two random variables covary with each other. And then another, so then you go, OK, I sort of accept this. now comes another sort of curve ball. How about the variance of the difference? Uh, the variance of the difference is not the difference of the variances adjusted for the covariance. No, no. It is the sum of the variances, minus 2 times the covariance. So there, that's a tricky one. OK. So this is not a typo here, the plus, OK. So the variance of the difference between two random reals is the sum of the two variances, the individual variances, minus the +22 times the covariance between these guys, OK? Um, Yeah, and how would you prove this, again, going back to the definition of the variance. Any questions? So we accept that now. Uh we might, we do, we will need these throughout the semester, so it's good to, to be aware of them, but I'll also pointed out and become. We will get used to it. Next, so an important conceptual, conceptual chapter now is the distinction between a population and a sample. So before so far I gave you a fake population distribution population OK now we talk about a sample and we contrast it to the population and that is important because um everything we do in in statistics in econometrics in data analysis is dealing with samples rather than populations. I don't know what makes this noise. Oh, it comes from here. She All right. I don't know, old computer. Um, so let's have a look. A population is a well-defined group of subjects. It's a very soft definition. The population contains all the information on the underlying probability distribution. Subjects in the population aren't just people, although for us oftentimes it's people, but it could be in economics am I saying this here it could be firms, it could be countries, it could be households, it could be um. Um, Workers, those are economic examples, and uh, but it could also be, you know, taking this into other fields, Australian citizens, I mean, any, any country, uh, kangaroos in Titpinbilla, and this is actually what I will go with in a second. I don't even know how to say this, leukocytes in the bloodstream, protons in an atom. I don't know how to say this in yoghurt. OK. That's all subjects. Um. And could make up a population. Um, let's go back to the actually, we go to the Australian citizens in a second. The population size N is the number of subjects in the population. So if you think about protons in an atom, I'm guessing that's a very large number. OK. Um, we typically think that N is very large, in fact, so large that observing the entire population is. Seen regarded as impossible. So mathematically we think that N is near infinity even though many applications clearly not the case like um well sorry this infinity equation here is just to suggest that we regard this as unattainable, symbolising that we're not able to observe the entire population like even in a A country like Australia where the population is relatively small, if you compare it to China for example, you go and check this just this afternoon before the lecture, the population clock is at 27553,445. That is not a large population. Yet for us econometricians, if you, if you told me you're going to go out there and collect information on every Australian citizen, that's it's very difficult for me to do. OK. I don't have the funding for that, not even the ABS does. Or if if they try. They can still not succeed because they can't reach everyone. They're trying in the census, but they don't succeed, OK? They get, they might be getting near it. The point that I'm making is, am I saying this on the slide, for all practical purposes, we, we regard the population as so large that it might be as well infinity, even though it's a finite number. This year is a finite number, 27 million, but we regard it as unattainable. So another example, much more relatable, or maybe not, is how many kangaroos live in Titpinbilla. Do you know Tidbinbilla? It's a, it's a nature reserve. It's like 45 minutes outside of Canberra. Um, you could ask how many kangaroos live there? What's the population size of those kangaroos in that nature reserve. You would think it's a finite number, and sort of attainable, but not really. I go, go to the visitor centre and ask them how many kangaroos have you got? I don't think they could tell you. It's also a changing number, right? I'm just making the point that nobody knows. Or you would have to spend considerable and unreasonable resources at obtaining that number. I mean, there's a whole statistical subject called population counting, but uh we're not getting into that. Um, and the point is estimating what the population size is rather than trying to really get the real size of the population. So we treat that population side as unimaginable, though it's clearly not infinity, OK? So the point is this for some reason we are not able to observe the entire population. We don't know how large it is. It's too difficult, too big, too costly, whatever. Instead, we only have a random sample available. So we're going, so we're doing this in a second, let's run through this slide first. A random sample. Of size Lin Lin subjects. Selected at random from the population. Without replacement, OK, you don't want a person twice. Um, each subject of the population is equally likely to be included in the random sample, and typically little N is much smaller than capital N, which was the population size. So instead of giving the entire population of kangaroos in that nature reserve Titilla, the rangers allow you to randomly sample 30, for example. We're getting to that thought exercise in a second. The random variable for the I randomly drawn subject is denoted Y subscript I. OK. And because each subject is equally likely to be drawn, And the distribution is the same for all individuals I or subjects. The random variables Y1 through Y little N are called independently and identically distributed. Independent. Because no subject is repeated and identically distributed doesn't mean that they all have identical attributes, but as a statistical phenomenon, um, let's say you're interested in. Heights or age, whatever you're interested in, the distribution is the same for every subject. Their realisation is drawn from the same statistical distribution. And we write that why I is IID. Around a population mean new sub Y and the population variance sigma squared. Given a random sample, somebody gives us a random sample. This is in fact what I give to you in the weekly computer tutorials, a random sample of size N. Um, you have little N realisations, Y1 through YN. Of the IID random variables Y1 tonne. What do you do with a random sample? You calculate a sample average as opposed to a population mean. So now comes the contrast between these topics. In analogy to the mean of the population, we now define the mean of a subset of the population, and that is. The sample mean or sample average, as opposed to the population mean? And it is This thing here, the sample average is the average outcome in the sample. So we call that thing YA, that's the symbol that we give it, and it's all your little. Uh, here I use the random variable representation that then takes on particular outcomes. You average that and divide it by as many observations that you have in your sample. OK. So for example, I, let's let's say you guys are a random sample of EAT 2 or 7 students. Which you're not, because you have selected to be here, which makes you better people than the rest. So that makes, means you're not random. But as a thought experiment, We all know you are better people, but let's assume you are an average, so, you, you are a random sample of the EME 2007 population, which roughly is 120. I can see that on water. This year is, I don't know what 40, 50. Um, I could ask everyone here, how old are you? I get, let's say 50 data points. I added together and divide by 50. That's the Sample average for the forage in the EMA 2007. Uh, in this particular sample, OK, and we take that as an estimator for the population mean. Um, so that's relatively easy, of course, to understand. Any questions? OK now. Um, OK, here comes my thought exercise, going back to my kangaroos. Let's say you're interested in learning about the weights of kangaroos in Titpinbilla, the weights now, OK, I'm going with weights now. We drive to Titinvilla. We rent a bus, we go there, all 50 of us, and collect 30 kangaroos at random and measure their weights because we have those skills. These numbers are all completely made up. OK. I, I googled quickly how much does a kangaroo weigh, but I didn't even hesitate to a second whether these numbers are anywhere near what they're supposed to be. But we do sample 30 kangaroos. And um we weigh it, we write down 30 numbers and average them out, and we get the number 52. Don't ask. OK. So the average kangaroo in this particular sample was 52 kg. OK, this is useful or interesting information. There's a huge difference between the population mean and the sample mean. There's only one population. But there are many, many samples, this is what I'm saying there, but there are many different random subsets of samples of the population. And each random sample might potentially result in a different sample average. So let's say. We go to Titminbilla another time, 2nd time. We collect 30 kangaroos. By the way, it doesn't have to be 30, but just let's keep the thought experiment simple. Another, well, we randomly sample 30 kangaroos. And I'm guessing they won't be exactly the same 30 kangaroos because we're randomly sampling, and the population is larger than 30. So would you expect the sample average to be 52 again? No. And that's when in my my kids when they learned probability at school, they go, while it is possible that they weigh 52 on average, it is not probable. That's what they tell me. Oh, that's cool statistics in primary school. And so while it is possible, and it would be a big coincidence, that the second random sample of 30 kangaroos average out to 52 kgs, it is not, so it's possible, it's not probable. What do they weigh in my second fake example, they average out to 49 kilogrammes. I'm just making the point that your random samples will give you different answers. Different random samples will give you different answers. Actually, I'm doing right this year. This was uh really motivated from when my daughter was in primary school. I did like it so much. And now we go again because in my brain, we can do this many, many times. And a third random sample they average out to 55 kg, and what you, you do this 1000 times, you can plot a histogram. What do you think the shape of that histogram would be? We're working towards this a normal distribution maybe. Well, we're headed that way. But let's not get, get ahead of ourselves. Um, this illustrates that the sample average itself is a random va. That's a bit of a surprise or maybe not. OK. And I, I want to stress, I don't know if I'm saying this here. If the exercise was we, we rent a bus, we go there together and we collect, we have Infinite resources are available, we collect the entire population of kangaroos, all 400 of them, I don't know how many, and you average their weight, and let's say, where were we? 50 kg. And you do that same exercise the next day, it will still, it will be again 50 kg, never mind that some of them might be growing or dying, but uh just under the same conditions. The population is fixed. The sample knot, makes sense. That's sort of the key distinction here. Um, Now in real life we're never given 1000 random samples. What I do to you every week, I give you one random sample drawn. Let's say what do we do? What do we do in week 4? I give you a random sample. I think it's data from from the textbooks, so it must be data from the United States of, I think it was 17,000 people, OK. That is one random sample of size 17,000. I'm not giving you 1000 random samples of size 17,000. So in reality, we're only working with one random sample, but the key thing to learn or to understand here is that the random sample that's in front of you is one realisation of a random variable. the sample average that you obtain is one particular realisation that you got from this random sample. So this illustrates that. A particular sample average, or first of all, the sample average as a statistical concept, is a random variable. Random variables have statistical distributions and so we can ask. If the sample average is a random variable, it must have its own mean, population mean, it's own population variance, standard deviation and distribution. For the distribution we're guessing from our stats knowledge that it's a normal distribution and we're headed that way, but let's work out first. What the mean, the population mean of the sample average is and the population variance, and this, this might sound confusing. What's the population mean of the sample average? We're understanding now that the sample average is a random variable, and as such it must have a mean, a population mean. And the variants, population variances, what am I saying here? So let's work that out. Yeah, ugly looking slight, but this is like Eit one double one. Uh Big picture is this on the left hand side, we want to know what is the expected value of this thing called YA. YA is well defined. It's the sample average of which we understand now. This is the kangaroo exercise that it is actually a random object, a random variable. As such, it has an expected value. What is an expected value? If you believe all the ugly notation here, we arrive at this result. The expected value of the sample average. After all these derivations is equal to muy. What was that? It is, it new of Y is the mean of the underlying random variables that The sample average is composed of. So, These guys here, why? So I OK, so the individual weights, if you, if you go with the kangaroo example. Have an expected value. They come from the population distribution of kangaroo weights, and what we're finding here is that the expected value of Yibao coincides with that. So this is a good feature for the sample average to have. It's expected value. As equal to the population mean of the individual YIs that make up the sample average, and that's the reason why the sample average is a good estimator for the population mean. Because its own meme coincides with the population mean. Does that makes sense. It's a bit, uh, it might be a little bit confusing, but uh I hope I'm getting that point across. Any questions there? As a mathematical fact or feature. The mean of the sample average is new sub Y. New suby, what was that again? It is the population mean of the individual random variables that the sample average is composed of. And that's in fact, the purpose of us averaging in the first place. Like we would like to know what does the population mean of Titinbila kangaroos, the weight, OK? Well, we can't collect all 400 kangaroos if that's the population. We go in there, get one random sample, averages out to 52, and go, That's our best guess for the population mean. The sample average that we obtained when we went there for the first time, collected 30 kangaroos. The sample average was 52. We take this, this is the sample average. We take this sample average as our best predictor or estimator for the unobserved population mean. Which I think in my fake example was 50. Do you remember that? So I said, if you could collect all 400 kangaroos, I'm just saying this is the population size, and they average out, so population mean is. 50 Um, Then the sample average has that as its expected value. The particular realisation of the sample average might not be that, OK. The sample average might um might be 52. This is what happened the first time we went to. If you collect 1000 sample averages, plot them, where will the distribution be anchored? At the mean of the population. In my fake example, that was the 400 kangaroos that whose population mean was 50. OK. Particular sample averages that you obtain might deviate from that, but on average, the sample average averages. To the population mean. OK? So I did say this on purpose now, but I hope it makes sense. OK. Enough said. And I trust you can work through this on your own. For the variants, you go, all right, so the big picture for the sample for the mean of the sample average was it inherits the population mean. So, therefore, if you ask the same question, What's the variance of the sample average? You go, ah, I don't even need to look at this here. It must be the population variance. That's not true. The the variance always has to be complicated. OK. The variance of the sample average is not equal to the population variance. But if you look at the result at the bottom, it is equal to the population variance, which is this Greek letter sigma squad sub Y divided by N. So if, if my kangaroo population has a variance, the weight, I'm making this up now of 20. OK. That's the population variance. I'm just sort of playing the oracle that actually knows the population values. So if that was 20, but in my first sample of 30 kangaroos, it was 18, OK. Oh sorry, um 30 kangaroos. Uh, 18 is not a good example. I have to divide it by 30. Um, it would be a much smaller number. Like 1.5 or something like that because you averaged. That's what this result tells us. The variance Of the sample average, Is the variance in the population divided by N. And that's an important lesson that the process of averaging. Drives down the variance. Which is a good feature, which Which tells you that the larger your sample sizes and as the sample size. The more precise. Um, the sample average is. In informing you about the population mean. It's also intuitive. Like if you say, rather than sampling 30 kangaroos, can you sample 300 kangaroos? you, if you could do this, it would be more costly, but statistically, you can't lose by doing that. The larger the sample size, the better. Um, ignoring costs. OK. That's the message here. Um, so there's a bit of a It shouldn't be a surprising result, but it's an important result to understand that the variance of the sample average is not just the variance in the population, but it's divided by N. So it's driven down by the sample size. Your estimate in a way becomes more precise. OK. Any questions? Is this the last slide here? No. This is the last slide. Um, the last slide is easier. I mean the standard deviation of the sample average is just the, the square root of the previous slide. So this is the trickiest bit, but did you guys sort of understand the distinction between population and sample? And that's sort of the big goal here is to use the sample average as the. estimator of our best guess for the population mean, and that is motiv motivated by the fact here, oops, that the expected value of the sample average coincides with the population mean. Which would be great if someone gave you 1000 sample averages. What you would do is You average the sample averages, and that then is equal to what the thing that you're after, the population means. Like I said, in real life, nobody ever gives you 1000 samples. You're only given one sample. This is where the second slide is helpful you go. If you only give me one sample, it better be large because then the sample average as a randva has a small variance. The the end here is the sample size. Any questions? Too easy. Cool. See you next week.

SPEAKER 1
Mr. I never. Yeah I Yeah. the question. I most of it. So. This Yeah I. Yeah. Yeah How would you get The Download this to your

SPEAKER 2
computer that Because Brings cannot come.

SPEAKER 1
What I said.

SPEAKER 2
To go to what you just downloaded. Oh you need to download it into the right place.

SPEAKER 3
Books.

SPEAKER 1
So I would have to actually download it into the

SPEAKER 2
right location and you can open it.

SPEAKER 3
I think I see something maybe you should get here.

SPEAKER 1
Notebooks.

SPEAKER 3
I don't know how you. should be able to.

SPEAKER 1
No I know because I I Um Because I want your desktop one. directly Let's see what I don't know why it says.

SPEAKER 2
To someone if you find.

SPEAKER 3
Yeah Yeah.

SPEAKER 1
But the truth is Um.

SPEAKER 2
Uh, we, we hope that it will be able to be able to open it already, and they can help you, but I mean this, you seem very, very close. It's just when you drag this over, yeah, it's more changed. The file type and it's enough to just change the

SPEAKER 3
lock.

SPEAKER 1
It has the my glasses, yeah.

SPEAKER 2
It Some something happened when you download it before the file. Try to download it again. to that There's something funny happened good Uh, OK.

SPEAKER 3
That and that's.

SPEAKER 2
That's how it looks like you would get that.

SPEAKER 1
Also direct you to the folder.

SPEAKER 2
Yeah. Why you talking Not Here is that it should be.

SPEAKER 1
Try to fix those my Here, so yeah, this is

SPEAKER 2
the philosophical when I was talking about.

SPEAKER 1
Yeah, could you explain why why you've chosen. because Yeah. This one I treat these guys as random vis.

SPEAKER 2
For the actual computation calculation of the sample average, but plug in the realisation, so it's a bit of a hybrid sometimes I look at the sample averages calculated plug in the realisation, and you take the little wires, but sometimes we treat it as a statistical object like here, uh, the capital.

SPEAKER 1
What even is the meaning of capital Y with a

SPEAKER 3
subscript I? Sorry, why is the random variable, right?

SPEAKER 1
So let's say, going back to my example. That represents wave Yeah, the first But that that will

SPEAKER 2
be the first as a distribution. So the small YI is the first one is the first actual way, yes. Capital Y is sort of a random representation before you collect that first kangaroo. The the the render that represents all possible values that

SPEAKER 3
its weight could be. OK, a bit abstract.

SPEAKER 2
Uh, capital Y is subscript I is for the I subject. The thought of the random process or the thought process of. What could all of its weights be and what are the probabilities attached to it? So the context makes clear whether I talk about a

SPEAKER 3
little while. To few slides earlier here where I have the big

SPEAKER 2
one is a bit confusing. It's like um whether you treat it as a random

SPEAKER 3
or whether you're interested in the actual realisation for mechanical

SPEAKER 2
calculation of what the sample is right so this is

SPEAKER 1
keeping it abstract like in general, right. But when we actually have an actual sample, then we should write small wire.

SPEAKER 2
Excel is always you interested in the statistical property capital Y or are you interested in calculating specifically another way.

SPEAKER 1
Right, so this the capital Y is like the property where small y is the realisation of that property on

SPEAKER 3
the makes sense. OK I want to Yeah, statistical feature of that thing,

SPEAKER 1
right, right, regardless of what it actually is.

SPEAKER 2
And how it worked? some sort of file corruption problem.

SPEAKER 1
Now it's not even working for him.

SPEAKER 2
infectious. I'll just log out my computer in case somebody else is coming, um. I don't know. It's a I mean, you're close, but.

SPEAKER 3
all good in there.

SPEAKER 1
It looks like it doesn't even know To do with

SPEAKER 3
it.

SPEAKER 2
What about I, I, I, I think that's what I'm just reading weblock files are not the actual files. I need to somehow get the actual.

SPEAKER 1
We just keep down like Let's look at the demo. Now you can work on it because the the weblog

SPEAKER 2
doesn't download the actual file. I just looked on my. Somehow a link to a file but then your programme can't open it like that. So what's the the assignment I saw that it was.

SPEAKER 1
It was a different, um. No, no, that's an I don't know what that was. There was there was another file which is just I just do you know by very used to it right

SPEAKER 2
now there's a lot of uncertainty. The tutors will help, right? But if at this stage you're at least able to open this, this is all we want, but it's understood that the unders understanding students is always 10% that trouble. But you, this wasn't a struggle. It's just a minor hiccup here. Luckily you had to juggle. Thanks guys. Have a good week.
