SPEAKER 0
This material has been reproduced and communicated to you by or on behalf of the Australian National University, in accordance with Section 113% of the Copyright Act 1968. The material in this communication may be subject to copyright under the Act. Any further reproduction or communication of this material by you must be consistent with the provisions of the Act. Do not reproduce this material. Do not remove this notice.

SPEAKER 1
that Alright. A little after 5 past, so we will get started. Welcome back everyone for week the end part of week 11. My God, we're getting towards the end of the semester. Um, today's gonna be hopefully not too bad, it's gonna be nice and smooth. We're gonna talk about externalities for a little bit. Um, a lot of this is stuff, as I've, I say it's a lot, a lot of this is stuff you've seen before, we'll go a little bit deeper, we'll be a bit more clear and a bit more careful with some of the stuff that we're saying as well. But basically we're gonna be talking about externalities, um, super important topic because, That's sort of eternalities are kind of one of the main reasons we would be expecting or wanting government intervention in some markets. Right, monopolies are are a reason why you might see some government intervention, um, cos they're, you know, it's still a market failure, or issues around like imperfect information as we talked about, might be some reason why you see government intervention, but externalities are kind of the easy one to explain and to argue for people, right, to say, well, look, there's a externality and that means that we're having under or over provision, so the government needs to do something about that. And also it's kind of in some ways, while there are still issues and we will talk about them, it's kind of the easiest one for the government. To fix, right, it's really hard to fix imperfect information problems, it's kind of easy to fix, it's kind of easy to fix externality problems, and in a certain sense, it might be easy sometimes to fix externality problems. Um, so that's what we're gonna be talking about today, we're going about negative externalities, and then we'll talk about positive positive externalities. Um, before we do that, as usual, admin stuff, um, I don't think there's really anything new here. We will have, and I will post this this afternoon, we will have additional consult times in week 13, as you would kind of expect. So in preparation for the exam, there'll be. Consults on the Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday, would it be useful to also try and have extra consults on like the Friday of next week? Or would it be better just to push everything into Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday? Who would think Friday is useful, would be useful, who'd rather have the times on Monday to Wednesday? OK, we'll do some, we'll we'll we'll push some of them to be on Friday as well. It'll be on Monday, Tuesday Wednesday anyway, I'm just saying we'll have some on Friday, in addition, like, instead of having, Lots on Monday, we'll have half on Monday and half on Friday. Kind of deal. Um, that'll be for the next week, Friday next week through to Wednesday after that, for additional pre-exam consults. Other than that, I don't think I have too much. I need to talk about administratively, any administrative. Questions, questions or problems? It's all clear, we're all fine, yes. There is a practise exam, I will post the practise exam, that is on me, I will post the practise exam this afternoon. Yes, I'll post last, I'll basically post last year's exam. Again, the same sort of caveats hold for this as hold for the mid-semester exam, which is, It's not exactly the same, but it's pretty similar, the course isn't exactly the course isn't exactly the same, but the course is pretty similar, um, the structure is not the same, but the structure is similar, the structure last year didn't have a multiple choice section, for example, but we will this year. Um, of somewhere between 20th and a quarter of the exam, multiple choice, as with, as it was with the mid-semester. Is that, yes, lovely. Otherwise, any questions? Cool. OK. Let's talk then about externalities. So some of this is a recall, right, and economic activity, we talk about it producing externality, if it has an effect, which might be good or it might be bad, but it has an effect on people who aren't involved in the production and consumption decision. Right, so on the rest of society, anyone who isn't actually buying the good, or buying or producing good, who isn't involved in the decision making process, right, because all of our things that we talk about so far, we talk about the benefit to the consumer, the cost to the producer, we've talked, you know, that's the that's the phrasing we've used. But potentially be, you know, consuming something gives benefits or costs to other people. And we talk about these as spillover effects, right, there's lots of things that have positive externalities, right, which is when the rest of society benefits. Our standard examples are things like education, like, yes, it's great, you you get education because it's good for you. Right, as a student, um, the producers who, you know, if we talk about say private schooling, producers produce that because they can get money from you and they like being able to extract funds from you because the thing that they want is to have money and they can produce education and you want that in place until they sell it to you. And that's all fine, none of that none of that is the externality. The externality is this idea that if we have a society in which lots of people are educated, that then gives you additional benefits to the rest of society, right? Um, and so, for example, you know, at the baseline level, it's a, it's a much easier to operate society if everyone can read. Right, it means you have all these additional benefits that you have in terms of how society operates, if you can just naturally natively assume that everyone knows how to read. That's not a benefit that accrued to, you know, that's not a benefit, the fact that you can read is of benefit to advertising agencies, because they can use words in their ads, right? That doesn't benefit you that they can do this, it doesn't benefit the con it doesn't didn't change the cost of the consumers, didn't change your decision making process in making this, it's a benefit that they get, right, that someone who didn't get to make the choice on the basis that you can read. And you had that at higher levels for for various different levels of education. You say same sort of things for vaccinations, right, it's good for the person getting the vaccine, absolutely, right, there's there's private benefit. And there's private cost, it cost money to make this happen. But there's benefits to other people through herd immunity and that kind of stuff. And you get baseline stuff, right, looking, you know, a nice looking front yard. I walked, when you walk into work and you see when you walk into uni and you see the people with nice front yards, you go, oh this isn't that nice. You didn't accrue the cost, you didn't make the benefit, you didn't make the decision, but you get some benefit from it. And obviously lots of things with negative externalities, pollution, your stock standard one, road congestion, messy front yard is the sort of the. Side version, the other version of the nice looking front yard. These are our positive negative externalities, again it's benefits to other people that aren't making the decision. Any questions, problems? Lovely. So we do, and, and as we always do in our economics classes, is we do modelling, right, this is our idea, we think there are goods that have this kind of property. How do we, how do we think about modelling these things? And we're gonna model them in kind of the usual sort of way, right, we have quantity, we have dollars per unit, and we've always talked about like demand. Being the marginal utility, right, the some of the marginal utilities for each, well some of the, some of the quantity, some of the demand for each individual, but it's driven by marginal utility for consumers, um, we talk about supply, which is driven by the marginal cost. For uh for producers, and what we want to add on to this is we want to add on to this and say, well actually when we talk about this marginal cost, this is really the private marginal cost. It's the marginal cost that accrues to the producer. This is really private marginal utility, it's the marginality that accrues to the consumer. But there might, in the case of externalities be other things that we have to worry about. Notably here for negative externalities, we can do this differently, we will talk about that later, but for negative externalities, there might be as well as the cost to the producer. There might be a cost to the rest of society, right. When a coal plant runs, it generates, um, it generates a cost to the coal plant owner, right, because they have to buy the inputs and pay the workers and and man the machines and all that kind of stuff, but it also generates a cost to the rest of society in terms of pollution and in terms of, you know, air pollution and carbon pollution. And so the way that we model that is we say, well there's the cost to, you know, for each unit being produced, there's the cost to the producer, which our private marginal cost, and then on top of that, right, if we want to think about producing this, this, this Q0 Q0 unit, it's a weird word, um, there's the cost to the to the producer, and then on top of that there is an additional, Cost to the rest of society, which we call the marginal external cost. So it's external because it's not the firm, it's not the producer, it's external to the external to the firm, and it's a marginal cost because we're talking about the, the cost to society of of that due north unit, the marginal cost of producing that unit. And obviously at every level of production, right, we can talk about the marginal external cost. And it may be that sometimes the different production levels, the marginal external cost is small, maybe it's big, it can vary across production levels. You might think of there being some kinds of instances where the marginal external cost is, you know, really big for the first couple of units of production, but then gets smaller, the more and more you make of it, or you might think the opposite, right, for the first few. is not such a big deal, but then it gets bigger as you get bigger, right? Um, so I'm using the same example again, but coal pollution is probably coal burning is probably a good example of this, where for relatively low levels of production, it's not really that big a deal. Right, when we talk about coal burning at the level that it's done in 1900. There's pollution effects and there's local pollution effects and those are negative to the rest of society, but that kind of global level of coal production, there's no, there's no global warming issues around that, right? Whereas the modern level of coal production, we are talking about those kind of global warming issues as well as local localised issues with with pollution. So potentially for that kind of market, you might be thinking about small production levels have small marginal external costs, big production levels have big marginal external costs. And you could have other, you could, you could have examples that go the other way as well. I can't think of any off the top of my head quickly, um, you could have examples that go the other way as well, where the first couple of units are really bad for society, but once it's already done, once like the damage is done, then the damage is done and more coal, more of whatever it is, doesn't cause additional damage, right, so may, and that would be something like, Oh A a Social marginal cost curve. That looks a bit more like this social marginal cost, which is our private marginal cost, but also this marginal external cost. This is where our marginal external cost is getting smaller, the more we, it's still negative, it's still a negative externality, but the first one's really bad and the last one's like, whatever. This is, this is. Yeah, I guess that example, this is, this is whatever this is. If anyone can think of an example. Where they might, where this might be the case, yep. Bad neighbours, sure, bad neighbours is great, right, if you have one bad neighbour, I mean, yeah, it's maybe, it's kind of not really a markets process, but I can see the idea here, right? If you have one bad neighbour, it's terrible. But if you already have 15 bad neighbours, then 6, the 16th bad neighbour is whatever, right, it's not great, but it's whatever. One person in the dorm next to you playing loud music at 2 a.m. is annoying. It is really annoying, right, the 16th person around you doing it is like, OK, whatever, doesn't really make a big difference. Yes. If you are purchas Yeah. Right, so you absolutely can, and we'll go, well I'll just skip ahead to where we say this, and we'll come back. Let's kip ahead to the answer where we say this, it's here, here we go. Um, we've modelled this as a posit as a, as they being a being an increase in the marginal external cost, right, there's a cost to society. Um, you absolutely could have this as, as you as you're sort of I guess suggesting as um a reduction in the benefit that the consumer receives. That might be the thing that happens. Uh, it really depends on the on the, on the, sorry. Mathematically, modelling wise, in terms of outcomes you get exactly equivalent. Makes absolutely no difference whether you, whether you put a positive marginal external cost or a negative marginal external utility. Right, those things are exactly equivalent mathematically and and and modelling wise. Um, there are circumstances, you know, there are, there are, when you look at, look at specific examples, there are times when it makes more sense, I think, to put in the marginal external cost, if we talk about coal production, right, as our example, that's that's kind of clearly, clearly when the producer does this, it imposes a cost on society, um. But you can talk about other examples where it might be a matter of um of reducing marginal benefit, and that might be congested, your congested roads for example, right, so that really is like it's not that the rest of society is made worse, it's that each person has a reduced benefit. Um, that they receive, but as I say, mathematically it doesn't make any difference at all, we will usually do this as a positive marginal external cost because it's easier to to work with. Does that answer your question? Lovely. Oh, we're back. Yes. Mo We can, we won't we won't go through the modelling, but it's it it works out to be the same if you push. The demand, demand, if you push the demand curve down to get social marginal utility being lower than private margin utility, everything all worked out the same way. I would encourage you to try it, but it does work out the same way. We need to see the results first and we'll see that the results won't matter if you do it that way. OK. So this is what we have happening in our in our world, right, we have private marginal cost and private marginal benefit, private marginal utility, but on top of that we have this social marginal cost, and this creates a problem for us, right, it creates a problem for us because if we let the market do its thing, The consumers don't care about the progress of society, the consumers care about their own utility from consumption, and the producers and the producers don't care about the rest of society, the producers care about their, their profit maximisation problem. And so this additional externality has absolutely no different makes absolutely no impact on things like the equilibrium outcome, the market equilibrium outcome, because the market still clears. At QE PE, right? That's gonna be still our our stock standard market clearing. Whatever, market clearing quantity, market clearing price. So that's our equilibrium. And the problem is that, you know, one of the really nice things for our markets was that the equilibrium outcome was also the efficient outcome, the proto efficient outcome, and that's no longer the case, right, because if we talk about trying to maximise total welfare, we get it we get now a different answer. I think this is on my next slide, isn't it? Yeah. We're now a different answer, and if we try and look for the social optimum, we're gonna see something else happening. Let's look for the social optimum. When we consume different levels of goods, so I, so, well, yeah, when we consume different levels of goods, when we consume that first good, what's the cost to what's the, what's the benefit to society of consuming the first good, it's way up here. What's the cost of society consuming that good? Well, there's the private cost. Down here. There's also the cost that accrues to the rest of society, right, the negative externality, so the social cost, Is at this level here. And so when we look at the benefit minus the cost to society, this is the total surplus that accrues from production and consumption of the first unit of the good. Right, we get lots of marginal utility, which is social but also private marginal utility, and then we also get the down to the red line of the social marginal cost. And we do the same thing, right, for the 2nd good and the 3rd good and the 4th and 5th and so on. Right, this is our total surplus. And we sort of see pretty quickly that if we went to consume more than the level indicated just here, we would start to be losing total surplus. Right, so if we tried to consume beyond here we get that the total cost of society exceeds the benefit and we lose surplus if we produce those goods. And so in terms of social optimum. Our social optimum is in terms of total wealth maximisation is different than the equilibrium level. Which is market which is, you know, which is market value, market failure is when the social optimum level is different than the market equilibrium level. And that's what we're that is not, hopefully not surprisingly, what we're seeing here. This is the Max possible. Total sales. Total circle that accrues when we consume at QStar. Any questions, problems? All good. Lovely. Marginal cost is the cost of the rest of society that last year of production, socially efficient outcome is when the marginal utility is equal to the marginal is equal to the marginal social social marginal cost. And so what we have is we have a problem that the unregulated market overconsumes. this no, we'll, and we will look at dead weight loss here. The unregulated market overconsumes because the unregulated market does not take into account this negative externality. The unregulated market consume produces at private marginal cost equals marginal utility. That means that social marginal cost exceeds marginal utility, which is a problem for our society. Um, and so if we think about, Yeah, I'll just put it on this graph. If we look at, no I won't, I wanna grab, I wanna grab a new graph entirely. Q dollars per unit. Private marginal utility. Private marginal cost. Social marginal cost. Let's do our normal welfare analysis, because those are always nice. So our normal welfare analysis for a, for this, to a normal welfare analysis. For our negative externality world, for our unregulated market, and we're gonna find dead weight, we're, you know, hopefully it's not gonna be that surprising, we're gonna find dead weight loss. What's gonna be a little bit confused or a little bit weird looking is where the dead weight loss lives, um, but, Well, we'll see, I I'll talk, then I'll talk about it. Um, so then regular market produces its quantity QE, sells things for price P superscript E for equilibrium price. We can talk about consumer surplus, as always, consumer surplus is below marginal utility, private marginal utility, above the price that they actually pay up to the amount they actually consume. So consumer surplus is our nice little region in here. Right above price, below marginal utility. Up to the amount they actually consume. And of course producer surplus is kind of the same, right, it's it's above the costs that the producers pay. Above the cost the producers pay, but below the, that's not ideal. Don't know why that worked, it shouldn't have worked, but it did, so let's go with it. Um. Uh, up to the amount that they actually produced. But our total surplus doesn't just consist of consumer and producer, our total surplus in principle consists of four things producer surplus, consumer surplus, what are the other two that we have as part of total surplus calculations? Their weight loss is not, I want to be careful here, their weight loss is, sorry, I'm gonna just jump on this and say no, um, their weight loss is not part of total surplus calculations, their weight loss is a residual that we get out at the end, that that we is the sort of the residual, it's the, it's the how is one of the screens on but not the other one? Like using the document camera, but. Given the. Issues that have been Ongoing OK. That is working I know there were some issues this morning, right, about um, About internet issues, I was. I saw a few places posted, ah. Uh, we'll come back to their weight loss. I will come back to their weight loss, but so our four components which aren't dead weight loss are consumer surplus, producer surplus, yep. So surplus, that's one way to say it, right? Benefit to benefit or cost to the rest of society, right, anything that comes from externalities, uh, which is gonna be here, and the one that we're not having on our graph yet but we have talked about previously is government, government revenue, government revenue or taxation. There are 4 our four components. There's no government revenue or taxation here, I don't know why it's on one screen, um, I apologise. Could be, might be really rough for people who are listening online afterwards because I have no idea whether the recording has worked. But we're here now, um, so there's there's cost to the rest of society, right, and as always, the way that we work out costs to society, or costs is we add up our marginal costs. We don't have external costs on this graph, we have marginal external costs. And so for the first good, the cost of society is that marginal external cost. And for the second good and the 3rd and the 4th and the 5th and and so on, all the way up to the amount of the goods that was of the good that was actually produced. And so this is our This whole level in here is our externality, it'd be great if this worked. Document camera, all displays. It's gonna be a really weird lecture if I don't have if I don't have visuals. Document camera. I'm gonna restart the system and see if that helps. I don't even get the PC to display. Okey dokey then. Was that noise someone's phone or was that noise something from up here? That's alright, I'm just wondering if. Cool, um. Chat amongst yourselves. I'm just gonna quickly phone IT and I'm gonna be told that they're crushed getting crushed by, Good phone IT and try and find out what's happening. Hi Senna, my name's what's that. My name's James Taylor. I'm in the Coombs lecture theatre and I've lost all access to the uh uh the. Um But The whiteboard display, the the big display has gone down, yeah, not sorry not whiteboard, but like the, the projector that the word, the projector's gone down, I have no access to it through any of the presentation means. I still have access to my little dashboard, um. A No, nothing, no, the monitor's not showing anything, monitor's black as well. The touch panel is responsive. Yep, yep. I have, I will do it again, I have tried I have tried that already, but I will turn it off and on again, um. System is starting, please wait. Yeah, correct. It's a pretty quick shutdown process of browser. I pressed shutdown, it said it shutdown. I pressed start back up and it started back up, it's still dead. Yeah. No, it's, it's, it's a quick process, but no, it didn't make any difference. I'll do it one more time. System is shutting down, touch anywhere, turn the system on, I touched, turn the system on, system is starting, please wait. And I'm back in now, but there's nothing on the screen. Yeah. Yeah, no worries. Yep. OK, sure. Sure, easy. Alright, thanks very much, bye. Alright, IT is working on it, so we will talk about a bit about a few things and then we'll then we'll see what happens over time. Their weight loss, so we, we did kind of get the screen just up there right at the end there, um, and we saw that, you know, there's a bunch of overlap where your external cost to society overlaps your producers surplus, and those cancel out in your normal sort of total surplus calculation way, but there was that additional little red bit at the top, which was, which ultimately ends up being your dead weight loss. For dead weight loss, we want to not think of dead weight loss as a component of total surplus, right? Total surplus consists of the four things we said, right, surplus, consumer surplus, government revenue or spending, and externalities, or external costs or benefits. Um, when we think about dead weight loss, dead weight loss we want to think of as the difference between, The best possible total surplus, right, the maximised total surplus, and the surplus and the total surplus that actually accrues under some sort of circumstance, right? So in the model we just looked at, the negative externality, the unregulated market results in dead weight loss, because when we when we work out the total sur. for the unregulated market, and look at what that is, and we look at the total surplus that would be maximised if we maximise total surplus. We get a difference between those two things, and it's the difference that's dead weight loss. But dead weight loss isn't a component of total surplus, and I, I, I strongly encourage you not to think of it that way. Does that address your Concern, lovely, excellent. Any questions on that point? And clearly we get, we get, you know, we get the weight loss because we have. An unregulated market. So there's overconsumption, overconsumption means their weight loss, and so we get our normal questions of can we solve this, if we can, what kind of limitations do we face in the solution, in in for the for the different sorts of solutions that we have. Um, I'm just gonna keep, keep pressing on. The big thing that we typically think of as the best solution, which you probably have done in politics classes as well in your in your in in those sort of things, is our coast theorem idea, is our is our assigned property rights. Right, so the coast theorem is a, it's a theorem, it's, you know, carefully done out and it's proven properly but it broadly speaking says that under the right kind of conditions, which we will talk about in a second, if we assign enforceable property rights to one side or the other, And allow negotiation to occur, that negotiation will eliminate any kind of, will eliminate the, well, sorry, will mean that we end up with um with producing at the social optimum. Right, so this is our idea of um the actions that I'm taking in my production process cause damage to you. And so if I'm entitled to as a negative externality, if I'm entitled to do my production process. Right, if I have an enforceable property right, clearly defined enforceable property right to be able to to be allowed to do the corruption process, but it causes harm to you, then the social optimum level would be too much harm to you, right, harm to you that's that's that's not at the right level. That means we're overproducing the good. But with that, if there's proper property rights in play, you can then come to me and say, look, you can keep producing this good and causing all this negative to me, but why not instead, why don't instead, I, you know, you'll come to me and say, I'll pay you some money to produce less. Alright we'll negotiate and you'll give me some money, and I'll say, OK, sure, I'll I'll therefore reduce my production, and we can we can end up in a situation where we're both happy with that trade, because at, because if we're producing at the socially in optimum level, it's because the harm I'm doing to you exceeds the benefit that I'm gaining by doing the pro pro problem. Which means that there's scope for trade because you could then give me some amount of money that's less than the harm you receive, but more than the benefit that I gain from doing the process, and then we both become better off, right, same thing as we talked about, similar to what we talked about in the general equilibrium world, right, um. So cos theorem basically says that, that that's a really good process, that process, that sort of broad idea works, and so I have a little story here, um, what do we have here? It'd be great if I had this, um, Rock Liquor Mining Co opened a new coal mine in Queensland, the runoff damages the reef, causing harm to the tourism operators. We can plausibly by assigning property rights to either group, to one of the groups, we can end up in a situation where the appropriate amount of runoff is done, right, where at the margin, the, the marginal damage from additional runoff is the same as the marginal, Benefit I guess, of doing that. For the for the producer, and you just transfer money in a way that makes that happen, we will we won't quite see this, but um, so there we have questions that come up, right? Who holds the property rights? Who should hold the property rights? In some cases it's, it might be clear, but in some cases it might not be clear. If we talk about Rock Liquor Mining Co. who has a new coal mine and the runoff is damaging the reef and hurting the tourism operators, who would be the right person to hold the rights to do the runoff, right, when you build a mine, you, you, you know, you, you own the land that you're doing it on, you own the river that that flows out of you. Surely you should be able to do what you want with that, or you're a tourism operator. Part of that is that you have access to, you know, you've you've bought this and set up this business because you're in a pristine area, um, and so the runoff from that damages you directly and you should have the right to continued pristine environment, cos that's what you bought. Right, so there's a discussion there on who has the, who, who should hold, who does hold the property right, and indeed who should hold the property right. And part of the government process is determining who holds the property right, um, and making sure that it's enforceable and all that, um. Possibly you could talk about transferring that right, um, and so if, but if we have the right in place, then these kinds of negotiated side payments um can remove the externality. Oh sorry, not remove the externality, that's that's the wrong wording, and that's what I have on the screen, and that's would have on the screen, that is the wrong wording. Some sort of appropriate transfer of payments can mean that we produce the social optimum level. That doesn't mean none. That means at the social optim, there's still a negative externality, they're still gonna exist. We're still gonna have Rock liquor Mining Co pumping waste into the river, just not so much waste, not as much as they would. Or, or whatever, right, you tend to have lower levels of um of production for the of the negative externality. Any questions, problems? With the idea for Coach's theorem. Yes. Property rights and why they're feeding. The property rights are the. So we, uh, is the story, does the story feel like a reasonable story to tell? Why does someone need Right, because if no one has property rights, then how can you negotiate on this, right, because if no one, if, if the, If the right to pollute the river. Is not owned by anyone. Then you can't negotiate on it, the the, if the, In order for the tourism operators to pay the mine, The mine needs to own the right to pollute the river. Otherwise they otherwise they wouldn't pay, they would say no, we have the and if tourism operators own the right to a clean river, then the mine would have to pay them in order to pollute the river. So if there's no property rights, then there's no one to pay to stop them doing stuff, right, um, and, and in a certain sense there's always property in a certain sense there is always a property right, it's just a matter of who it lies with. Um, so when we talk about, um, carbon pollution, right, is, is, is the one that I go back to a lot, because I think that's, that's, that's kind of the big one for this, for this problem, um. Who owns the right to. Low carbon pollution in the air, and in 1990, the answer was pretty firmly on the side of people who want to pump carbon in the air, own the right to do that, right, they own that property right, um, and now there's more questions around, well who really should own that property, right? Um, should it be the people who want to do that, or should it be governments in the society at large who then would have to be paid in order for the firms who want to do that to do that. Does that make sense? Yeah, excellent. Thank you. Questions for the question. Don't know how we can do this without screens, uh, we'll see how we go. Um, now, the cost theorem sounds amazing, right? It sounds like, OK, cool, so why don't we just do this, we just, as as the government, there's no need for us to really do anything, we just make sure that property rights are clearly defined, and then people will negotiate and it'll be completely fine. And there's no need for anyone any other government. In my view, the co theorem is horribly misunderstood, right? Um, the co theorem is a mathematical theorem that says that under certain conditions we can negotiate. But really it's almost a negative result, it's really not saying in certain sense, it's not saying under certain conditions we can negotiate, it's saying in order to be able to negotiate and have negotiation be the like the thing that solves all of our problems, we need such phenomenally stringent conditions that we're almost never gonna be able to do this. So, for the little story we told where there were two firms, it was, it was fine. But you need clearly defined property rights, which, as we just sort of said, might be clearly defined, but sort of might, might not, there might be debate over who owns the property rights and to what extent people own the property rights, right, do firms have a property right to pollute? Do consumers have a property right to have a messy front yard, right, do drivers have a property right to drive on roads, whether they're congested or not? Maybe, should they, maybe, but like the property rights aren't clearly defined. You need them to be enforceable, right, so we need it to be a case where if the tourism operator owns the rights to a clean river, that they actually have some sort of mechanism to enforce that, right, because if you, if you know, they in principle own the rights, but the polluter just says, yeah, whatever, and does it anyway, then there's not much, not much point to having the rights. You need really, really small transaction costs, right, if it is incredibly expensive to do the negotiation. Then it doesn't really matter that in principle, if the negotiation was free, you can negotiate if, if the total, you know, surplus benefit that might be gained by negotiating is, you know, $1000 but negotiation requires lawyers, then it's never gonna happen, and so you're gonna get suboptimal production levels. Um, you need, and this flows into um transaction costs, you need not too many people to be involved, not too many groups to be involved, um, mainly because it increases the, well, mainly because it increases the transaction costs, but it also makes negotiation much more difficult, right, if there's one firm that's polluting and they're harming 50 people, how do you decide how much each of the 50 and the and the firm has the production has the property rights. How do you decide which of the 50 people pay how much to the firm, right, um, so which makes things tricky. It's also, and this is a very specific one that you need to have no what we call wealth effects, so you need the, the different groups to be of similar, similar size in terms of um, In terms of their marginal utility of dollars, um, otherwise it doesn't, otherwise the, the, the results don't really work. So you need marginal utility of dollars to be the same for both, for all the all the affected groups. And that's a lot of things that we're requiring, right, clearly defined property rights, which sometimes happen but not always. Enforceable property rights, which sometimes happens but not always. Small transaction costs, few affected parties, no wealth effects, which means if you're talking about any of the big problems that we're talking about for particularly negative externalities, the cos theorem is not gonna be of any use to us at all. Right, that just assigned property rights and let it let people transaction is not gonna work for us. So if we're talking about climate change mitigation, which is the one I've come back to because it's the, the big one, Assigned property rights and let people transact is just gonna be completely pointless because there's not clearly defined property rights, right? Does society own the right to zero parts per million pollution, or does the firm own the rights to do what they want, right, and it's unclear. Are they enforceable? Not really. How can, if we talk about this at a country level, right, and Australia wants to reduce its emissions, and Australia would like, I don't know, what's the bad, the US to reduce their emissions. We can't, we can't enforce that, even if we claim to have property rights, we can't enforce on the US that they reduce their carbon emissions. There's no scope for there's no, there's no enforcement scope there if you're talking about negotiation between countries on carbon emissions. There's phenomenal transaction costs, right, we have the, Every 2 years, 3 years, 4 years, is it every year, um. Meeting of the climate change, UN climate change conference, pardon? Yeah, yeah, which is every 2 years. Helen? Every year, it is every year, is it? We have COP every year, right, but that's a big meeting that costs a lot of money to run and to operate. It's clearly phenomenally high transaction costs. Um, we're talking about, if we're talking about this at a country level, we're talking about 100/150 countries that are involved, so 150 different groups. We're talking about groups that are wildly different in terms of size and in terms of the marginal utility of dollars. Uh, and so something like a simple cot theorem of give someone the property rights and then walk away is just not gonna be remotely useful for those big problems. It's useful for small problems, not at all useful for big problems. They said they would phone back, um. Any questions? Problems? Coach theorem, it's nice when it works, less nice. When it doesn't work. I am not sure how to do this without a picture. Let's just turn this off and on again and see if it helps. I don't know why it would. Oh now I've lost control of this. Fantastic. So, what other things might we do? You guys can tell me one of these at least. If we, if we don't want to just do a cos the, if we want to do some government intervention to fix this problem, what else might we do? Yep. We can tax them, right, perfect. Hey, um, the problem is that too much of this stuff is being made. We know that if we apply a tax that discourages production and consumption, so we just apply a tax. Done, right? Um, and in our micro one world this is completely fine, and this is so the short run story is pretty straightforward, it's the same as our micro one, with a potentially minor caveat depending on who you did micro one with, but basically you go in, you look at the marginal external cost and you apply a tax equal to the marginal external cost. Right, so that's the, that's the downside to society, and so we just internalise the cost, right, rather than society paying the cost, now the firm who's producing the good will pay the marginal external cost, so we internalise the externality. We need to be a little bit careful with this, even in the short run, a little bit careful, because if the marginal external cost varies for different levels of production, then saying tax at the marginal external cost is kind of a, doesn't make sense as a sentence, um, and so if we're careful, we would say that we tax at the marginal external cost at the optimum level of production. Right, whatever the marginal external cost is of the optimal production level, that's the size of the tax that they're going to assign. Because then everything's, everything works out, right, then we produce at the optimal level, um, we've fully internalised the externality at that level and and everything's fine. Huge and it says on my slides which you can't see or you might be able to see huge upsides. Right, this is fantastic. We improved total surplus because we moved to the from from the overproduction to the actual optimum level of production, which is great. We also get to have tax revenue, which is great as well, right, because from the government's perspective, well. From a, what am I trying to say here, from a political economy perspective, this is really, really nice because the government likes having tax revenue, if you go to the government and say you can do this policy, and it'll be good for society and also mean that you end up with some tax, the government will be over the moon, right, very, very happy with this as a as a thing to implement, um, that's good, that that that's fantastic. I say this at a, at a higher level, this is also really, really good, this is an additional benefit. Because while we, while we tend to assign tax revenue as like a 1 to 1 benefit, um, tax revenue typically has a better than 1 to 1 benefit because tax, the point of tax revenue is to then be able to use that for things. And so if we look at the secondary markets where the tax is spent afterwards, then you might get, then you'll typically get a better than 1 to 1 social benefit from the spending of the tax, um, and so having that tax revenue is better than just. The social benefit that it appears to be. So this is great, right, bigger total surplus, maximise total surplus, and some tax revenue to use elsewhere. There are Issues, or sorry, I guess first off, any questions though, questions, problems? Cool. There are some issues even with our short run, even with our short run instance, um, there are some issues. Do you want to hazard a guess or read off the slides, um, what some of the issues might be that we have. Yeah. Information issues, um, so there are potentially information issues here, as there as there always are with these kinds of government interventions, right, when we're doing anything with government intervention, it, we talked about this with monopolies, it's, it's might be hard for the government to intervene because for the government to set the tax at exactly the right level, they need to know exactly what the right level is. Which might be tricky to know, um, depending on, you know, they don't have full information, um, just to work that out they need to know the marginal utility for the consumers away from the market equilibrium level. Right, and so if all you see is the snapshot of the market which says this market is producing this much stuff and selling at this price, you don't, you don't know what demand looks necessarily know what demand looks like away from that. You don't necessarily know how big the marginal external cost is of different of different processes, and those are the things you need to know to be able to establish an appropriate tax. And that might be, as I say, it might be difficult. There's also potentially, as it says on the on the screens that you can see sometimes is this potentially implement implementation issues, right, so our implementation issues are, Can you actually, can you actually physically do this, right, if you have a road and you think the road is congested and you'd like to try and fix that by by putting a tax on using the road, can you do that? Is it actually a physical thing that you can do? It might be possible, but it might just be physically impossible. It might be practic it might be like politically impossible in certain circumstances. Right, it might be politically difficult to put a tax on pollution of various sorts, but it might also be physically difficult if we're talking about road congestion, for example, to deal with this problem. Probably also politically difficult to deal with road congestion. Um, New York, I know, just put in their road congestion, um, not fines, like to drive through the city at different times, you have to pay a big pile of money, um, and they sort of can do that because they have a strict number of entry points, and, but politically it was so practically it was possible, politically it was difficult. I can't imagine politically in Canberra how that would go with trying to charge people for driving in various places, it would be, it would be tricky politically. Um, OK, questions on implementation issues. Or difficulties around this. This doesn't say don't tax externalities, it's saying, look, it's not that easy. Alright, long run effects, we really need a screen for this. We will actually take a short break and we'll reconvene at 11 o'clock, by which time hopefully things will have fixed up, um, but we'll talk about some long-run issues around this, because the long run issues are not. Tweak things a little bit. Alright, we'll come back in about 5 or so minutes, see you all at 11. Thanks. Yes. Such a good system for big scale things. As talked about earlier, we have subsidies, right, the problem is under provision, the solution for underprovision is to subsidise the market. Government steps in, provides a subsidy, the optimum subsidy level is our Peruvian subsidy, again after Mr. Piggu, Doctor Piggu I guess, probably, I don't actually know, um, after Piggu. Who figures out this is the thing you can do. The level of subsidy you do is the size of the marginal external benefit at the at the social optimum level, because then you internalise the externality, right, the consumer or producer, depending on who you're paying, um, recognises this fact and they go, oh, I don't really want to bother making my yard nice, but I know that if I make the yard nice, the government will give me money. And so I'm gonna make my yard the right amount of niceness that is good for me, and that also, if the subsidy's been set at the right level, that also means it maximises social welfare. Um, so you subsidise. Same story as in micro one, and you end up and if you do it correctly, you maximise social welfare. If you do it wrong in the sense of if you put in place the wrong size of subsidy, you probably still increase social welfare, just not maximise it. But the problem is under provision, subsidies increase production and so you're probably doing better by subsidising. If you subsidise just a tiny bit, you will improve social welfare. If you subsidise just the right amount, then you will massively improve social welfare. If you subsidise a little bit more than the optimal amount. You won't maximise social welfare, but you'll still improve social welfare, right, so you end up being near the optimum level of production. The point I'm bringing across here is if you put in place a massive subsidy, right, if the optimum subsidy is $1 and you subsidise as $100 per unit, you're probably you're almost certainly gonna end up in a world where you're now massively overproducing the good, right, so way too big is still a problem, but if it's not exactly right, that's still beneficial. Um, so your information issues are a problem, but if like, If the optimum level you think is $10 for the subsidy, like maybe it's $8 and maybe it's $12 you put in place $10 and if you're wrong by a bit, that's still fine. It's all good, it's just not the best. Excuse me. Any questions, problems? And we have the same problems with long-run effects, which is that if you have some social optimum level of quantity that you want to do, and you apply the subsidy that in the short run leads to that level of quantity. Right, so in the short run you increase your production to the optimal level. But then, because you've applied a subsidy, the price firms receive has gone up, that means firms making positive profit, more firms enter, which drives production even further out. That might not be socially optimal, optimal. Um, and so again, you want to be looking at that long run, if you, if you wanna get the, the long run optimum. Subsidy size, you wanna be looking at the long run supply curve, not at the short run supply curve, because firms will enter because of the subsidy. Because Because our, if our problem is under our problem currently, our initial problem is under production. If we put in place a subsidy that entirely deals with that in the short, in in one go in the short run. Then we're at the optimum level. If firms then enter, we're then moving out further, and we're now, and we're now overproducing. And so if we're trying to get from, we're trying to get from A to B, and if we go all the way from A to B in one go, then firms enter and we start getting over here and overproducing. And so maybe we want to get from A to B, we go from A to somewhere between these two things with the initial subsidy level, right, a small subsidy that doesn't do quite as much. And then firms enter to get us up to B. So potentially you want to put in place a smaller subsidy than what it looks like you want to put in place. Or you might put in a big subsidy initially and then claw it back gradually until you get down to the the level that stabilises you at the optimum level. OK. Questions, problems? Nope. Nope. There's only 15 minutes left anyway, so. Any other questions for for sorry for Peruvian subsidies? Short runs same as micro one in the we have this long run issue as well. OK, price controls, price ceilings, price floors. What do we reckon? Price ceilings, price ceilings or price floors? Who reckons Price ceilings. Price walls Couple of fast laws, both. Neither Couple of votes for neither, I'm likely that there's votes for neither. What was the one we had quite a few votes for price, neither is the right answer, just to be, just to be super clear and quick on this. What would the price floor, what were the price floor was the commonly said one, right? People put their hands up mostly for price floor, yeah, um, the issue for price floor, price floor in a sense makes sense to us because price floor. No, I have no idea why why why price price ceiling almost makes sense to us as consumers. Right, but a price floor is high, right, a price floor is high up and so we see consumers buying less of the good straight right off the bat. So I think that's, I would think that's the easy one from the consumer side, right, consumers buy less of the goods or less is less is made and produced and sold, and that's bad because we're restricting production. Price ceilings I think are a bit trickier, they're not trickier, but I can see the how the mistake is made more easily for price ceilings, right, because prices are low down, because if, because our experience of the world is as consumers, right, we, we don't think of, we, we probably have limited experience as producers. Most of our experience of the worlds of the market economy is as a consumer. As a consumer, you say, well yeah, if you want to make people buy more of the good, you, you keep the price low, and then people will buy more of the good. Problem is, of course, that to have trade in a good, you need consumers who want to buy it and producers who want to make and sell it. And the effect of the price ceiling is that producers don't want to make and sell the good because the price is low. So neither of these things are gonna work for us here, right? Price ceilings, as we just discussed, price ceilings down here, um, keep firms out of the market, right, keep production low and therefore reduce production even further. That's a problem for us because our thing we wanted to do was increase production. Price floors up here. Reduce consumption, right, people buy less of the good. Um, and so we also see reduced consumption of the good, reduced production and consumption of the good. So either price both price ceilings and price floors reduce consumption, and so neither are useful in any way to talk about, um, talk about positive externalities because they either drive consumers not to buy or they drive firm not to produce. Either way, you get less goods being traded. Um, so there's nothing we can do in that regard. They're, they're not useful for positive externalities, they're fine for negatives, not useful for positive externalities. Any questions, concerns? Problems. Cool We can do our tradable permits, actually we do have time. We can do our tradable permits. Our tradable permits work all exactly the same way, um, we talk about them as tradable permits, and that's probably not, and that that's the wording that would be used. You might want to think of these as tradable obligations, right, because these are things that, these are a permit that says, it's not a permit that says you can if you want to produce this good, it's a permit that says you must produce this good. If this is on the, on the producer side, this is a permit that says you must produce some amount of it, you must produce one unit of this good, right, so what what were our positive externalities that we had, um, It was a good one that works well for this. Vaccines are a different thing, go ahead. Yeah. Oh yes, this will be, this will be a subsidy. What you describe what you're describing is a subsidy. What you're talking there is a subsidy, yeah, it's a reduction in taxes, which is functionally a subsidy. Yeah, so your, your tradable your tradable permits which are your tradable obligations, it's a, it's a piece of paper that says, uh, so we talk about renewable energy, a piece of paper that says you must produce one unit of renewable power. You know, you, you can't do anything else, you must, you must do this thing. New power's a bad example, you must. Try to think of a good example. It's a good example for positive externalities that will work here? You must produce so many tech patents, maybe. Yeah. Possibly. Yeah. You can trade the, the, the requirement that says you must do this, yeah, possibly, I'll grab one more two raw if I can, yeah. Yeah, carbon offset credits are the are the kind of idea, right, you must plant so many trees, which are your carbon offset credits, which is the same, same principle, yeah, so carbon offset credits will work for us here. Um, so we'll talk about them in we'll think of them as carbon offset credits, right, so it's a, it's a tradable permit, it's a tradable obligation that you can trade away and you must do this thing, um. And these obligations have negative value for the producer, right, you are paid to take on this obligation. You are paid to take on the, um, the little piece of paper that says you must plant so many trees. And so what happens is, of course, that those things get traded on the open market, and they end up being purchased by the people, sorry, they end up being being accepted by the people who will accept the least amount of money for them, right, um, because, because the person who is giving them away wants to give them away as cheaply as possible. And so they'll end up being accepted that the the carbon offset permit, the thing that says you must plant trees, will end up being going to the people who will do that for the cheapest, who, who can, sorry, I should say, do that cheapest, right? It's not gonna go to me, I'm not gonna buy a carbon offset I'm not gonna buy a carbon offset, um, it might go to someone who owns. 10,000 acres out near Kosciuszko and can just plant trees for 10,000 acres, right, because they can do it more cheaply than I can. I don't own 10,000 acres. Did they? Jesus, that's horrifying. Um, yes, that would be the same, that would almost certainly be the same issue, yes. So the obligation is assigned, so for a conscription, if you could do this, and this is very historical, this isn't recent, but yeah, so, um, your name is pulled out of a hat and conscription is randomly assigned, and you now have this piece of paper that says you have an obligation. And you go, I have this piece of paper that has an obligation to fight in the army, who wants to, I, I will, I will, I will give this to someone, and I will give them some money as well, and I'm gonna give it away to the person who I have to give the least money to for them to take it. So it's exactly right. Good, that was a good example, thank you. That's actually a very nice example, thank you. Questions, problems, tradable permits. And yeah, you end up with the social optimum allocation, right, the people who own the permits are the ones who can service the obligation most cheaply, um, and that's good, right, you have efficient allocation of the obligation as opposed to efficient allocation of the, of the, the right. OK. I had nice pictures prepared for this one. Just as we talked about extreme negative externalities, where the optimum level where the where the thing that you did was just get rid of them, you can talk about extreme positive externalities, right, things where it's so large that subsidies either aren't sufficient or are sufficiently sufficiently fiddly that it's better to do things other than um subsidise where it might be better just to provide the good for free to anyone that wants it. If you want this thing, you can come and have it, right? You've all probably received emails um over the last, I know, I'm pretty sure, I'm pretty sure students get this, get this, pretty sure students do. You only received emails over the last few weeks about free flu vaccinations. Students get that right? Yes, lots of nodding, excellent. Uh, now free flu vaccinations, it's not because the university loves you and wants you to be healthy, it's because the university recognises that if you are flu vaccinated, then you're not gonna give the flu to other people. And that's gonna be beneficial for everyone in the society that we're in, um, and so the university therefore pays for it, right, it's not that they're, it's not, at least not necessarily that they want to make you better off, it's that they think that by making this thing free for you, That would provide sufficient positive externality on the rest of the society that we're in, um, that it's worthwhile, the rest of the university society that it's worthwhile. Um, we saw this obviously a lot with COVID vaccines, um, where these things were all free by the government, um, because it was thought that the benefit to society of having a vaccinated population is sufficiently large that the best option is to make it free. Uh, and that's, it's pretty simple and straightforward, and you can see this as a big positive externality, um, such that, particularly in things where there's like a, um, uh, a saturation level, where there's like 100% of people have the good, um, and the optimal level might just be that, right, uh, and so sorry, if you, if you increase social, increase the, the marginal benefit, the social marginal benefit is so big that even when everyone has the good, The last person to get the good still has social marginal benefit above marginal cost, then that, then you just provide it for free, you just, you just send it out and have have everyone do it. Uh, in some cases for things like vaccines as a sort of somewhat minor point, but some things like cases like vaccines, you may even want to pay people to do it, because there's gonna be people out there for whom the marginal benefits of receiving the shot and getting the protection from that shot might be negative. Right, if you're, if you are sitting here thinking I'm a fit, healthy person and I really, really hate needles, and 95% of people are already vaccinated, so the extra benefit to me is pretty minimal because we already have kind of close to herd immunity, and I don't like, I really hate needles and I'm kind of healthy, then maybe for you, the marginal benefit might be negative and you may choose not to get it even if it's free. And so we saw this a bit in America with COVID vaccines, where we saw people being paid to get the vaccine, right, because it was felt that there were these people, there were, there were too many of these sort of people who even at price zero would choose not to get it. Um, and that was, that was a problem from their perspective. They viewed the marginal benefit as being so big that it was worth paying these people to get it. So typically for these very, very, very big positive externalities, the outcome is make it free. In some limited cases you may even have to go further and pay people to get it. But that's somewhat somewhat uncommon. Uh, typical ones for this, uh, anything which is basically anything which is free, anything which the government is providing you for free is one of these kinds of extreme positive externality, can can fit into the framework of one of these free positive externalities. Right, the government provides to you for free, I mean apart from your taxes and whatever, um, education up to the end of year 12. Right, Beyond that they don't, but education at the end of year 12, they provide it for free if you, if you want to take that up on it. Uh, healthcare at the, at the Medicare level is provided for free. Right, the court system is provided for free because the positive externality is considered to be so big that it's better to make it free rather than to have anything else. Uh, so we have these kinds of things as well, where it's just a massive positive externality. Any questions, questions, concerns? Fantastic. In that case, we will finish up now. Sorry about the technical issues, I'm hoping that you all have Wi Fi still soon and that Amy was able to sort out the tech issues that apparently have been going on since midnight-ish, I'm told. Do you have any issues you can come see me now? Pardon, sorry. Earlier than midnight, was it? OK, I woke up, I must have been, I woke up this morning and saw, I woke up this morning and saw all the, the posts on being like, it's been going for 10 hours, but yeah, so. Hopefully it's better soon. Thanks everyone. If you have any issues, you can see me now with the usual sense. And I'll see you all next week for our last week.
